
=== Page 1 (selectable text) ===
EN 
 
 EN 
 
 
EUROPEAN 
COMMISSION 
Brussels, 22.6.2022  
SWD(2022) 167 final 
PART 2/12 
 
COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT 
 
IMPACT ASSESSMENT 
 
ANNEXES 
Accompanying the  
proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council 
on nature restoration 
{COM(2022) 304 final} - {SEC(2022) 256 final} - {SWD(2022) 168 final}

=== Page 2 (selectable text) ===
120 
 
Annexes 
Table of contents 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS ....................................................................................................... 121 
ANNEX I: PROCEDURAL INFORMATION............................................................................. 122 
ANNEX II: STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION ...................................................................... 140 
ANNEX III: WHO IS AFFECTED AND HOW? ........................................................................ 141 
ANNEX IV: ANALYTICAL METHODS ................................................................................... 159 
ANNEX V: SPECIFIC TARGETS CONSIDERED FOR THE MAIN ECOSYSTEM TYPES.. 171 
ANNEX VI: ANALYSIS BY ECOSYSTEM .............................................................................. 175 
ANNEX VII: DESCRIPTION, TRENDS AND IMPACTS OF THE MAIN OPTIONS ............ 176 
1 
BASELINE ......................................................................................................................... 176 
2. 
OPTION 2: OVERARCHING LEGALLY BINDING TARGET COVERING ALL OR 
MOST EU ECOSYSTEMS ................................................................................................ 191 
3. 
OPTION 3 AND OPTION 4 ............................................................................................... 200 
4. 
COSTS OF ENABLING MEASURES ............................................................................... 200 
ANNEX VIII: BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR POTENTIAL RESTORATION 
TARGETS ........................................................................................................................... 206 
ANNEX IX: EVALUATION OF THE EU BIODIVERSITY STRATEGY TO 2020: SUMMARY 
OF KEY RELEVANT FINDINGS ..................................................................................... 207 
1. 
THE EU BIODIVERSITY STRATEGY TO 2020 ............................................................. 207 
2. 
EVALUATION OF THE EU BIODIVERSITY STRATEGY TO 2020 ............................ 208 
3. 
KEY FINDINGS OF RELEVANCE TO THE EU NATURE RESTORATION 
TARGETS ........................................................................................................................... 210 
4. KEY LESSONS AND THEIR RELEVANCE TO THE NATURE RESTORATION 
INITIATIVE ....................................................................................................................... 215 
ANNEX X: COHERENCE WITH EU LEGISLATION AND POLICY INITIATIVES RELATED 
TO NATURE RESTORATION; APPROACH TO NON-DETERIORATION ................. 217 
ANNEX XI: RESTORATION FRAMEWORKS IN MEMBER STATES ................................. 242 
ANNEX XII: FINANCING OPTIONS AT EU LEVEL .............................................................. 244

=== Page 3 (selectable text) ===
121 
 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
 
BDS2030 
Biodiversity Strategy for 2030 
BHD 
Birds and Habitats Directives 
CAP 
Common Agricultural Policy 
CBD 
Convention on Biological Diversity 
CFP 
Common Fisheries Policy 
EEA 
European Environment Agency 
ELD 
Environmental Liability Directive 
EMFAF 
European Maritime Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund 
HD 
Habitats Directive 
IPBES 
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and 
Ecosystem Services 
LAU 
Local Administrative Unit 
LULUCF 
Land use, land use change and forestry 
MAES 
Mapping and Assessment of Ecosystems and their Services 
MBIs 
market-based instruments 
MSFD 
Marine Strategy Framework Directive 
NEC Directive 
National Emission reduction Commitments Directive (Directive 
(EU) 2016/2284) 
NGO 
Non-governmental organisation 
NRP 
National Restoration Plan 
UNCCD 
UN Convention to Combat Desertification  
UNFCCC 
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change  
WFD 
Water Framework Directive

=== Page 4 (selectable text) ===
122 
Annex I: Procedural information 
Lead DG, Decide Planning/CWP references 
Lead DG: DG ENV 
Decide Planning reference: PLAN/2020/8491 
CWP reference:  
In the Commission Work Programme 20211 ‘A Union of vitality in a world of fragility’ 
COM(2020) 690 final, this initiative is foreseen under the policy objectives for the 
European Green Deal, in particular under ‘Biodiversity and toxic-free environment 
package’: ‘New legal framework on the restoration of healthy ecosystems (legislative, incl. 
impact assessment, Article 192 TFEU, Q4 2021)’. 
 
Organisation and timing 
The Inception Impact Assessment (Roadmap) was open for feedback from 4 November 
2020 until 2 December 2020. 
The Open Public Consultation2 on the initiative was open for feedback online from 11 
January 2021 until 5 April 2021. 
An Inter-Service Group was set up in June 2018 to steer and provide input for the 
evaluation of the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020. In view of the close links, the same 
group provided steer on the EU’s Sixth National Report to the Convention on Biological 
Diversity (6NR). In 2020, this group also undertook to provide steer and input to the impact 
assessment for the EU Nature Restoration Law.  
The Inter-Service Group includes representatives from the Directorate Generals ENV; 
AGRI; BUDG; CLIMA; DEVCO (INTPA); ECFIN; ECHO; EMPL; ENER; ENV; 
ESTAT; FPI; GROW; JRC-Ispra; MARE; MOVE; NEAR; REGIO; RTD; SANTE; SJ; 
TRADE, SG. as well the EEAS. Relevant agencies, in particular EASME/CINEA, EEA 
have also been included in these consultations. 
The ISG discussed the initiative on legally binding restoration targets on 04/09/2020, 
21/01/2021, 16/03/2021, 30/04/2021, 11/06/2021 and 09/11/2022. 
The planned adoption date in the Commission Work Programme for 2021 was Q4 2021, 
however, it has been postponed to 23 March 2022, and then to 22 June 2022. 
                                                          
1 https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/2021-commission-work-programme-key-documents_en. 
2 https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/12596-Protecting-biodiversity-
nature-restoration-targets-under-EU-biodiversity-strategy_en.

=== Page 5 (selectable text) ===
123 
 
Consultation of the Regulatory Scrutiny Board (RSB) 
The draft Impact Assessment was submitted to the RSB on 17 June 2021. The RSB 
provided a first set of detailed comments its Impact Assessment Quality Checklist on 9 
July 2021. The meeting with the RSB on the impact assessment took place on 14 July 2021. 
On 16 July 2021, the RSB issued a negative opinion with comments. DG ENV revised 
the Impact Assessment accordingly, addressing the comments of both the opinion and the 
Quality Checklist, and re-submitted it to the RSB on 1 October 2021.  On 28 October 202, 
the RSB issued a positive opinion with reservations; the comments included in this 
second opinion have also been addressed in the Impact Assessment.  
The tables below (at the end of this Annex I) give an overview of the comments by the 
RSB in its opinions and in the Impact Assessment Quality Checklist, and indicate how the 
Commission has addressed each of these comments in the revised Impact Assessment.  
Evidence, sources and quality 
References to key sources and evidence (not exhaustive):  
Data and knowledge on the EU’s ecosystems (state, pressures, trends etc.) has been drawn 
from published reports which are authored and reviewed by a experts in the field, such as:  
 The first EU-wide mapping and assessment of ecosystems and their 
services3 (‘MAES report’) by the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre 
(2020); 
 State of Nature in the EU4 (European Environment Agency, 2020);  
 Regional Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services for 
Europe and Central Asia (IPBES, 2018)5; 
 Tucker et al., (2013)  Estimation of the financing needs to implement Target 2 
of the EU Biodiversity Strategy6. Report to the European Commission. Institute 
for European Environmental Policy. 
A wide range of specific scientific sources/publications have been used for the impact 
assessments of the specific ecosystem/species restoration targets. They are listed in the 
supporting study report7. 
                                                          
3 MAES report (2020). 
4 https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/state-of-nature-in-the-eu-2020. 
5 https://ipbes.net/assessment-reports/eca. 
6 Tucker et al., Estimation of the financing needs to implement Target 2 of the EU Biodiversity Strategy, 
2013. 
7 To be published in 2022.

=== Page 6 (selectable text) ===
124 
Policy-related studies/reports: 
 Evaluation of the Biodiversity to 20208; 
 Eftec et al., (2017) Technical support in relation to the promotion of ecosystem 
restoration in the context of the EU biodiversity strategy to 20209. 
 
Robustness and quality of data: 
As mentioned in chapter 2 (Problem definition), figures and data on biodiversity and 
ecosystem condition come from a variety of sources, data sets and monitoring 
methodologies (e.g. reporting by Member States, Copernicus land monitoring etc.) and are 
not always directly comparable and in some cases are based on incomplete reporting. 
Despite these shortcomings they do provide trends, from which clear conclusions can be 
drawn.  
External expertise: Service contract 07.0202/2019/806106/SER/ENV.D.2: "Supporting 
the Evaluation of the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020 and Follow-up" with Trinomics 
B.V. leading a consortium including the Institute for European Environmental Policy 
(IEEP), UNEP-WCMC, IUCN and ENT environment & management. Amendment N°1 
of this contract expands the scope of ‘phase 2’ of this contract to ‘the services needed for 
supporting the follow-up action to the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2030’, in particular to 
support the Commission in undertaking an impact assessment for a proposal for legally 
binding EU nature restoration targets in line with the Commission’s Better Regulation 
guidelines. The contractor is asked to ‘support the development of a proposal for legally 
binding EU restoration targets with the aim to restore degraded ecosystems, in particular 
those with the most potential to capture and store carbon and to prevent and reduce the 
impact of natural disasters’. The concrete tasks of the contractor included support to the 
public and stakeholder consultations and support in all steps of the impact assessment 
process. 
 
 
                                                          
8 Trinomics B.V. (2021) Support to the evaluation of the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020, and follow-up: 
Final study report (Publications Office of the EU, 2022). For a summary of main relevant findings: see 
Annex IX. Commission Report on the evaluation of the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020 due in 2022. 
9 Eftec et al., Technical Support in Relation to the Promotion of Ecosystem Restoration in the Context of the 
EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020, Summary Report, European Commission, Directorate General 
Environment, January 2017.

=== Page 7 (selectable text) ===
125 
RSB comments 
How did we address the comment? 
1st RSB OPINION (16 July 2021) 
(Opinion 1.1) Given that there is already a broad set 
of measures (both existing and recently or soon to 
be adopted) that tackle the biodiversity challenge 
and its drivers, the report should be more explicit 
on the specific gap of the problem that would 
remain that binding targets could help solve.  
Inserted an explanation in section 2.4 
(how will the problem evolve). 
Inserted an explanation in section 4.2, 
where legally binding targets are 
introduced, saying that they would 
address the specific problem gap. 
Explained why gap remains in section 
2.2. ‘Specific policy drivers’. 
Better description of the baseline in 
section 5.5 and Annex also makes this 
clearer.  
(Opinion 1.2) It should explain why a better 
implementation of existing legislation, as 
concluded by the preceding fitness check, would 
not be sufficient.  
Explanation added in section 2.1.1 
above Fig 2 and in  section 2.1.2 above 
table 1.  
Explained why gap remains in 2.2. 
‘Specific policy drivers’. 
(Opinion 1.3) The baseline should be more explicit 
about the degree of passive restoration that should 
already happen due to the effects of existing 
legislation on the drivers of biodiversity loss and 
ecosystem degradation. 
Better described baseline  in  5.1 
(policy option baseline) and in the 
Annex.  and elaborated on the 
expected degree of restoration under 
existing legislation and policy 
initiatives in Annex VII.  
Added an explanation to 6.2 to 
highlight the added value of the 
options in comparison to expected 
restoration under the baseline.  
(Opinion 2.1) Building on a sharper problem 
definition, the report should be clearer about the 
objectives. It needs to explain the difference 
between the overarching aspirational goal of 
restoring ‘all ecosystems’ and what this particular 
initiative is meant to achieve via binding targets. 
There is a reference to ‘at least a broad range of 
ecosystems’, however the report does not express 
this objective in sufficiently specific, measurable 
and time-bound terms.  
In section 4 on objectives better 
explained. General objective slightly 
revised to be in keeping with an article 
of TFEU (see also checklist 4.1,4.2,4.3). 
Issue if “all” and “broad range”  
ecosystems better explained. In 5.2.1: 
Policy option 4 ‘overarching goal’ re-
defined and better explained. 
In 6.4: adapted accordingly. 
(Opinion 2.2) The objectives should clarify the 
reference situation to which ecosystems should be 
restored. If defining the reference situation requires 
judgement on a case-by-case basis, the report 
should clarify how it would define and enforce 
binding quantitative restoration targets.  
Reference situation: explanation 
added in 4.2.

=== Page 8 (selectable text) ===
126 
RSB comments 
How did we address the comment? 
(Opinion 3.1) The report should better present the 
functioning of the options and assess more 
thoroughly their feasibility and effectiveness.  
Functioning of options 2 and 4 better 
explained in 5.2.1 (description of 
options) and 6.4 (effectiveness of 
option 4) 
Feasibility and effectiveness are more 
thoroughly explained in 6.1-6.4 
(effectiveness of options). 
Feasibility is furthermore incorporated 
in the description of achievability in 6 
(approach to IA). 
(Opinion 3.2) As regards the option of having a 
binding overarching goal for ecosystem restoration 
it should explain how the availability of the 
necessary data and methodology to establish and 
monitor an overarching goal (presumably at EU and 
Member State level) would be ensured and how in 
practice the final (quantitative) goal would be 
determined.  
5.2.1: Overarching target: limitations 
of overarching target added in Option 
2. 
Overarching objective better defined 
and explained option 4.  
 
 
(Opinion 3.3) Given that some ecosystems (e.g. 
urban, soil) are not covered by EU legislation, the 
report should assess more thoroughly the respect of 
the subsidiarity principle and the proportionality of 
legally binding measures.  
Ch. 7 (subsidiarity and proportionality) 
now includes a reference to the legal 
basis encompassing all ecosystem 
types  
An explanation was also added in the 
main text on why EU level action is, in 
terms of subsidiarity/proportionality, 
warranted on ecosystem types that 
are partially covered by existing 
legislation. 
(Opinion 3.4) It should clarify whether Member 
States can reasonably be expected to be able to 
operationalise the targets for those ecosystems and 
habitats where there is not already an evidence 
base and a clear methodology and whether such 
option would provide the necessary legal certainty.   
Further explanation added in ch 5.2.2  
(Opinion 4.1) Regarding the specific targets for 
ecosystems option, the report should clearly 
identify the evidence base and methodology 
supporting the proposed detailed targets by 
ecosystem.  
Explanation on evidence base included 
in option 3. 
Methodology and evidence for the 
specific targets described in detail in 
Annex IV.  
 
 
(Opinion 4.2) The views of different stakeholder 
groups on individual targets should be clearly 
presented.  
More referencing on this throughout 
the text 
How stakeholder views were included 
in the methodology and evidence for 
the specific targets now described in 
Annex IV. 
(Opinion 4.3) Concerning the combination option, 
the report is not clear how the two options would 
interact in practice and why it should overall 
5.2.1: Hybrid option 4 re-defined and 
interaction specific 
targets/overarching objective better 
described.

=== Page 9 (selectable text) ===
127 
RSB comments 
How did we address the comment? 
perform best, given the shortcomings identified 
above with the binding overarching goal option. 
6.4 Explanation added. 
(Opinion 5.1) The report should elaborate on how 
an EU wide enforcement of the targets and the 
achievement of the objectives will be done 
considering that Member States will determine the 
specific actions to take through national restoration 
plans.  
New section on enforcement added as 
a new sub-section of ch. 8. Further 
details also added in ch 5.2.2.  
(Opinion 5.2) It also should explain how the 
proposed options will ensure Member States’ 
ownership of the targets. 
Explained in sections as above 5.2.2 
and new sub-section in ch 8.  
(Opinion 5.3) It is not clear how different the efforts 
to be made by Member States will be, given that 
they have different ecosystems and habitats on 
their respective territories. 
Tables of costs and benefits per 
Member state and per ecosystem has 
been added in Annex III. 
Section on distributional aspects of 
targets added.  
(Opinion 6.1) The report should be more explicit 
about how the costs and benefits were calculated, 
what assumptions were made and what they are 
based on for all ecosystem types assessed.  
This is now better explained in Annex 
IV. Additional explanation has also 
been added on the costs and benefits 
calculation in each thematic 
assessment in Annex VI. 
(Opinion 6.2) It should also better explain how the 
opportunity costs were estimated including what 
assumptions were made and how they are justified.  
This is better explained in Annex IV. 
(Opinion 6.3) It should also be clear what 
“ecosystem services” are included in the benefit 
estimates for each ecosystem type assessed.  
Thematic assessments are now clearer 
on this, with references. 
(Opinion 7.1) The report should be clearer about the 
cumulative effects of the initiative on the different 
actors (fishers, farmers, etc.) and any resulting 
distributional impacts.  
Impacts on stakeholders addressed in 
Annex III and in main text, Ch 6. 
Workshop held that addressed this 
issue.  
(Opinion 7.2) It should also assess the costs for 
different Member States and regions.  
A breakdown of costs and benefits per 
Member state and per ecosystem has 
been added in Annex III. 
(Opinion 7.3) It should reinforce the 3 assessment of 
the administrative costs, including quantification 
whenever feasible. 
Section 6.2 and 6.3 (impacts option 2 
and 3): Added a more precise admin. 
costs breakdown for option 2 and 3 in 
the form of table. 
Section 6.4 (impacts option 4): 
expanded the costs overview with a 
more detailed cost breakdown for 
both restoration and maintenance per 
ecosystem type, and administrative 
costs.  
Chapter 7 (comparison efficiency): 
expanded the comparison on 
administrative costs. 
Chapter 6 (Intro of chapter: approach 
to impact assessment): added what is 
considered as administrative costs, 
and added a reference to Annex VII.

=== Page 10 (selectable text) ===
128 
RSB comments 
How did we address the comment? 
(Opinion 8) The views of different stakeholder 
groups should be presented more systematically 
throughout the report. 
More referencing on this throughout 
the text 
Stakeholder views w.r.t. options added 
in section 5.2.2. 
 
 
IMPACT ASSESSMENT QUALITY CHECKLIST ( 9 July 2021) 
(Checklist 1.1) The report does not sufficiently 
frame the initiative. While the annexes contain a 
large amount of information, it is not always clear 
from the report itself how the initiative links to 
other elements of the Biodiversity Strategy for 
2030 and to other related initiatives. For example, 
it is not immediately clear how the initiative will 
work together with LULUCF – how synergies will be 
ensured and under which of the two frameworks 
measures will be monitored and progress assessed.  
Moved 6.1 (impacts baseline) to 5.1 
(description baseline) and elaborated 
on the expected degree of restoration 
under existing legislation and policy 
initiatives. Description of baseline 
revised to include effects of other 
policies more clearly. 
Section 6.2: Processed the degree of 
restoration under current legislation 
into the policy coherence for option 2. 
Section 6.2-6.4: impacts of policy 
options (policy coherence): 
explanation added linking to other 
elements of the Biodiversity Strategy 
for 2030 and other Green Deal 
initiatives. 
Section 5.2.2. Now gives a more 
detailed explanation  of the links in the 
proposed LULUCF Regulation.  
Chapter 9: monitoring: added a 
paragraph on synergies with 
monitoring LULUCF 
(Checklist 1.2) The report does not sufficiently 
explain the international dimension of the 
initiative. The Biodiversity Strategy for 2030 refers 
to all the world’s ecosystems being restored. It is 
unclear if this initiative is meant to contribute to 
that, beyond setting an example and establishing a 
methodology that might possibly be useful to third 
countries.  
Added text in 1.1 on international 
commitment to restore ecosystems. 
Section added on ‘International 
dimension’ at the end of Chapter 8. 
 
 
(Checklist 1.3) It is not clear what the situation is in 
different Member States in terms of ecosystem 
condition and restoration efforts. The charts and 
graphs presented in section 2 of the report refer 
mainly to what is covered under specific legislation 
(i.e. the Habitats Directive). It is difficult to 
understand what this means at EU level and the 
extent to which there are differences between 
Member States in terms of their efforts and 
progress. 
Added at the end of section 2.2.1 that 
degradation applies across the board 
for all the main ecosystem types.  
Added in 2.1.1 that the main EU 
assessments (EU-Wide, EEA, and State 
od Nature) describe the condition of 
all main ecosystems and give evidence 
of distribution effects across the EU 
and MS.  
(Checklist 2.1) The report starts by indicating that 
the various specific environmental protection pieces 
of legislation in place are not sufficient to address 
the problem of biodiversity loss. If existing policies 
are not working as intended (p. 17-18), the report 
An explanation on why the option of 
revising existing legislation was 
discarded at an early stage is added to 
Section 5.3 (options discarded at an 
early stage).

=== Page 11 (selectable text) ===
129 
RSB comments 
How did we address the comment? 
should explain why they are not being revised. If 
evidence, for example, shows that the majority of 
habitats under the Habitats and Water Framework 
Directives do not have good ecosystem status 
(p. 11), this shows that there is a problem under 
these legislations that needs to be tackled. In fact, 
some legislations are being revised (e.g. the Marine 
Strategy Framework Directive) and it is unclear 
whether the expected changes would address the 
problems in such a way as to ensure the related 
ecosystems are restored.  
An explanation was added to 5.1 
(description baseline) on what is 
expected from the MSFD revision.  
Section 5.1 and 2.2 (problem drivers) 
already explain that BHD and WFD 
were assessed as fit for purpose and 
will therefore expectedly not be 
revised, despite the implementation 
challenges. 
(Checklist 2.2) Moreover, the report is unclear on 
the extent to which other Green Deal initiatives 
and particularly the broad range of other actions 
under the new 2030 Biodiversity Strategy will tackle 
the problem (e.g. gaps, implementation issues etc.) 
and which part of the problem remains.  
 
The report should indicate for which specific 
environmental legislation revisions will be launched 
(as announced in the 2030 Strategy) to tackle 
existing legislative gaps. It should clearly explain the 
specific contribution expected from binding targets 
on the remaining gap of the problem. 
Inserted an explanation in 2.4 (how 
will the problem evolve). 
Inserted an explanation in 4.2, where 
legally binding targets are introduced, 
on how they would address the 
specific restoration gap. 
Moved 6.1 (impacts baseline) to 5.1 
(description baseline) and elaborated 
on the expected degree of restoration 
under existing legislation and policy 
initiatives. 
Baseline revised and more explicit 
about contributions from other 
policies.  
Section on policy coherence of Annex 
VIII is moved to 6.1-6.4 (impacts of 
policy options) and expanded, building 
on 5.1. 
Revisions of the MSFD, Climate  are 
addressed in 5.1, and new/revisions of 
other legislation/initiatives are 
addressed in Annex X.  
(Checklist 2.3) In this framework, it is not clear what 
are the key drivers of biodiversity loss and 
ecosystem degradation that need to be tackled by 
this initiative. Most, if not all, of the presented 
drivers (climate change, pollution, over-exploitation, 
invasive species, changes in land and sea use; p. 15) 
are being addressed by other EU and national 
policies. 
Explanation added in 2.2. (above 
‘Specific policy drivers’) on how 
restoration addresses the drivers. 
Mentioned also in the box/summary 
at the end of section 2.2. 
(Checklist 2.4) When it comes to problem drivers, it 
is not clear why the intervention logic does not also 
list funding challenges and the political 
commitment and ownership by Member States. 
Political commitment now included in 
section on drivers. Intervention logic 
has been revised.  
(Checklist 2.5) The report briefly touches on the 
difference between protection and restoration, 
clarifying that a protected ecosystem is not 
guaranteed to evolve by itself to good condition. It 
is not clear however what the magnitude of the 
problem is. The report does not explain the extent 
Explanations added in section 2.1.1 
and also above Fig 4  
and in 2.1.2 above table 1.  
It is (was already) also explained in 2.2 
under ‘Lack of comprehensive 
approach.

=== Page 12 (selectable text) ===
130 
RSB comments 
How did we address the comment? 
of the problem beyond what is covered by the 
Habitats Directive annexes.  
(Checklist 2.6) The report argues that guidance from 
the Commission on ecosystem restoration was 
followed by some Member States ‘which suggests 
that it was appropriate’ (p. 16). It is not clear what 
evidence supports this statement. Could the reason 
not be that some Member States are more 
ambitious and committed about biodiversity 
protection and restoration than others? Could the 
reasons not relate to different funding and 
resources priorities or a lack of capacity?  
The paragraph has been rephrased in 
the section 2.2 ‘Voluntary targets have 
been ineffective’ 
(Checklist 2.7) The argument that healthy 
ecosystems lead to disaster risk reduction and 
control (p. 15) needs more evidence or should be 
nuanced. It is not obvious, for example, that having 
more forest will lead to less forest fires or that more 
natural coast lines will lead to less flooding from 
storms (e.g. a sizeable part of the Netherlands are 
below sea level). 
Explanation with examples and 
references added in 2.1.3 
(Checklist 3.1) The report should better 
demonstrate the respect of the subsidiarity 
principle. 
Addressed under Opinion 3.3 
(Checklist 3.2) For the ecosystems not yet covered 
by EU legislation (i.e. non-Annex I habitats forest 
area) and potentially subject to a binding target, the 
report needs to establish the necessity and value 
added of EU action for each newly added 
ecosystem or area (e.g. urban, soil). 
See answer to opinion 4.1.  opinion. 
This describes how targets proposals 
were arrived at. Needs for targets are 
also described in the thematic 
assessments.  
 
(Checklist 3.3) Some ecosystems or habitats might 
be near border areas and their protection and 
restoration would require the concerned Member 
States to act together. The report is not clear 
whether (and if so, how) the planned initiative will 
address this aspect. It should be also clearer on the 
magnitude of the transboundary effects across all 
ecosystems as well as the frequency of “free riding” 
practices. 
Examples of transboundary aspects 
added in 3.3. Little quantitative data 
available. Section on transboundary 
issues and how to address them 
included.  
Deleted ‘free riding practices’ from 
text since we have little actual 
evidence. 
 
 
(Checklist 4.1) When describing the objectives, the 
report is unclear about how the Biodiversity 
Strategy for 2030 goals will be reached. The 
strategy aims for all EU ecosystems to be restored 
by 2050. While this objective seems to be 
reproduced as the general objective also for this 
initiative, the linked specific objective however 
limits its ambition to (at least) a ‘broad range of 
ecosystems’ and introduces priority criteria 
according to which these should be selected (e.g. 
carbon capture, natural disaster impact).  
General objective slightly revised 
(checklist 4.3) Reference to how 
BDS2030 will be implemented 
included. Revised also the explanation 
of specific objective.  
“all” and “broad range” addressed 
below (checklist 4.2).  
There is an implementation plan for 
the BDS2030 details of this are beyond 
the scope of this IA.

=== Page 13 (selectable text) ===
131 
RSB comments 
How did we address the comment? 
(Checklist 4.2) The report acknowledges (in footnote 
19) that “it may not be possible to restore all 
ecosystems”. While this transparency is welcome, it 
is important to be clear in the specific objectives on 
what realistically should be achieved. The current 
wording of the specific objective of a broad range of 
ecosystem is not sufficiently expressed in SMART 
terms. It will prevent effective progress monitoring 
and will likely repeat the problems identified earlier 
in the report (p.17). For instance, it is not clear what 
the specific meaning of “restored” is. It is also not 
clear whether this concerns only an EU level 
objective or whether this applies also at the 
Member State level.  
Meaning of ‘restored’ explained in 
section 4.2 (just above ‘Operational 
objective’ 
A description has been added in 4.2 of 
the reference situation towards which 
ecosystems need to be restored. 
Specific ecosystem types to be 
covered are highlighted (bold). 
The additions make the objectives 
more SMART (more specific, 
measurable and achievable - they 
were already relevant and time-
bound.) 
Clarified in 4.2 that the specific 
objective applies to Member States 
and EU-wide.  
(Checklist 4.3) In terms of (public) expectation 
management and coherence, it may help to present 
the general objective rather as an aspirational long-
term objective (not for 2050), while targeting the 
specific objectives on those ecosystems where the 
evidence base realistically allows imposing binding 
targets.   
Suggestion taken on board in 
definition of general objective.   
(Checklist 4.4) The objectives should clarify what is 
the reference situation to which ecosystems should 
be restored. The report seems to indicate that it is 
not about restoring lost ecosystems (e.g. Brussels 
used to be a swamp), but about repairing the 
damage to still existing ecosystems. This should be 
made explicit in the objectives. 
Reference situation explained in 
section 4.2 
(Checklist 4.5) The report highlights the need for 
urgent action. Is the 2030 horizon a realistic 
timeframe considering the long time needed for 
concerned measures to have effect? 
4.2: Explanation inserted on 
‘restoration’ versus ‘recovery’. 
(Checklist 5.1) The baseline scenario is the one 
against which all options are compared. As such, 
section 6.1 should be integrated into 5.1 and into 
the narrative of the sections 6.2 through 6.4. The 
description of the baseline could then be more 
complete and useful for understanding the current 
situation and its likely development in the near 
future.  
See response to Opinion 1.  
 
 
(Checklist 5.2) The baseline should sufficiently 
reflect the other Green Deal initiatives, in particular 
the ‘Fit for 55’ package and broad set of measures 
announced in the new 2030 Biodiversity Strategy. It 
should clarify how it relates to the MIX scenario 
informing the initiatives of the ‘Fit for 55’ package. 
It should illustrate the evolution of the part of the 
problem that would be not tackled if binding target 
measures were not part of the new policy response.  
See response to Opinion 1. 
Section 5.1 (description baseline) is 
expanded to cover the Climate Law, Fit 
for 55’s LULUCF and RED revision, and 
BDS2030 measures.  
See also revised baseline in Annex VII.

=== Page 14 (selectable text) ===
132 
RSB comments 
How did we address the comment? 
(Checklist 5.3) Given the broad set of related 
(legislative) measures under the Green Deal and the 
2030 Strategy, the report should avoid giving the 
impression that the effective delivery of the 2030 
Strategy depends only on binding targets. Similarly, 
the report seems to underestimate the expected 
contribution of all the other measures (as indicated 
in section 5.1) when claiming that “in the absence of 
binding restoration targets the problem … risks to 
be further aggravated” (p.20). The baseline should 
also not assume that measures under the Green 
Deal will not be fully implemented (p.20). 
More precision as regards existing 
measures is now given and how 
exactly the targets can contribute. It 
should be understood that the  
binding targets would only be a 
component of delivery of the 
BDS2030, I.e to deliver on the pillar 2 
on restoration.  
Following agreement at the upstream 
meeting, the baseline is continued to 
be estimated as the implementation of 
all the contributions of 
the existing initiatives deriving from 
the Green Deal, that is realistic and 
as based on experience, and does not 
assume their full implementation.  
(Checklist 5.4) While some details are included in 
the annexes, the report does not sufficiently 
present the issue of achievability of options and of 
‘realistic’ implementation of existing measures by 
Member States.  
Included in 6.4 (effectiveness option 4) 
and 7 (comparison) why option 4 
scores higher on achievability than 
option 3. 
Realistic implementation of existing 
EU legislation is covered in the revised 
5.1 (description baseline). Annex XI 
outlines restoration frameworks in a 
number of MS but national measures 
are not mapped in detail due to the 
voluntary nature and limited 
reporting. 
(Checklist 5.5) The options are not sufficiently clear 
on what they aim to achieve: 
 
Policy Option 2 aims that “by 2050, ecosystems in 
the EU are restored to and maintained in good 
status” in principle covering “a broad range of 
ecosystem”. It is not clear what success would look 
like (e.g. how many restored ecosystems and how 
are “restored” and “good” defined?) and who 
would be responsible for achieving it (EU, Member 
States, joint responsibility?). It is also not clear how 
“a broad range of ecosystem” goal is easy to 
communicate (p.34) 
Explanation added in 5.2.1 (Policy 
Option 2) that it applies to EU- and 
MS-level, that ‘success’ is difficult to 
establish. 
Explanation of reference situation to 
which ecosystems should be restored 
(good ecosystem status) and the 
meaning of ‘restoration’ has been 
added in section 4.2. 
What success would look like is now 
described in section 5.2.2.  
 
(Checklist 5.6) Policy Option 2 envisages a “binding 
overarching goal” in absence of a sufficiently 
developed evidence base for ecosystems not yet 
covered by EU legislation (this would be left to the 
Member States). It is not clear how sufficient legal 
certainty on what needs to be achieved will be 
provided and how effective delivery could be 
ensured. The respective responsibilities at EU and 
Member State level are not sufficiently clear.  
Section 5.2.1. Policy option 2 has been 
revised to better describe these 
aspects.

=== Page 15 (selectable text) ===
133 
RSB comments 
How did we address the comment? 
(Checklist 5.7) More generally, the report should 
better explain why option 2 is a valid one to 
consider. Would changing the nature of a target 
(binding as opposed to the previously voluntary 
one) be sufficient to solve the problems identified 
until now? Will the flexibility it includes for Member 
States not risk that the objectives cannot be 
reached? How will it address the issues of 
insufficient funding and insufficient integration with 
other policies referred to in section 2.2?  
Option 2 changed from ‘goal’ into 
‘target’. 5.2.1. Policy option 2 has 
been revised to better describe 
validitiy.  
 
(Checklist 5.8) Given the questions that option 2 
raises, the report is not sufficiently clear in option 4 
what adding this (diluted) overarching goal would 
bring. The report clearly states that option 2 ‘by 
itself it would most likely fail to restore biodiversity 
at a level required to meet EU-wide and 
international biodiversity objectives’(p.35). 
Option 4 is redefined and better 
explained to distinguish from option 2. 
Adapted wording in 6.4. 
(Checklist 5.9) For option 3, the report mentions 
some sub-options (e.g. different target timelines) 
without providing any details. Without making the 
report too long, the description of the option should 
at least briefly explain what aspects the sub-options 
considered. 
Text has been added to explain the 
sub-options (different target 
timelines). 
(Checklist 5.10) In option 3, there are very detailed 
targets by ecosystem (in annex V). It is mostly not 
clear what is the evidence basis for these detailed 
targets. The report also does not specify the 
opinions of different stakeholder groups on these 
individual targets. Without this information, it is not 
clear on what basis policy makers should take 
decisions on setting these targets. 
As answered in opinion 4.1 
(Checklist 5.11) As an example of the lack of 
evidence, it is not clear whether the proposed 
targets to increase green areas and tree coverage in 
urban areas would be suitable. Reducing the built 
surface in cities can be achieved by extending the 
overall surface of the city, reducing the living space 
by person, or replacing housing by high-rise 
buildings. None of these solutions seems obviously 
desirable. 
The impact assessment on urban 
ecosystems has been revised and 
improved. 
(Checklist 5.12) It is also not clear whether the 
“range of ecosystems” under options 2 and 3 would 
be the same or whether there is a difference in 
terms of ambition. 
Better explained in options section. 
(Checklist 5.13) For all options, it is not clear how 
effective enforcement of the binding targets would 
be ensured. 
As answered in opinion 5.1 
(Checklist 5.14) The report should be clearer about 
the methodology that would be used to monitor 
and measure progress towards the achievement of 
the targets. It should explain whether this is already 
As answered in opinion Opinion 3.4.

=== Page 16 (selectable text) ===
134 
RSB comments 
How did we address the comment? 
being developed (p. 55 seems to indicate that 
efforts are ongoing), whether it would apply in all 
options, the extent to which it would imply new 
requirements in addition to existing legislation ones.  
(Checklist 5.15) The report should explain how 
effective ownership for eco-system restoration will 
be ensured for eco-systems where effective 
cooperation of third countries (e.g. Russia, UK, 
Turkey, Norway) will be essential. 
Section on transboundary effects 
included. 
(Checklist 6.1) The report should better explain its 
evidence base and methodology – as it stands it is 
difficult to form a view about the robustness and 
credibility of the analysis. Annexes III, IV and VI do 
not include sufficient detail.   
As answered under opinion 4.1, I.e. in 
Annex IV and as addressed in each 
revised ecosystem assessment (Annex 
VI). Detail on impacts has been added 
to Annex III. 
(Checklist 6.2) For many ecosystem types, Annex VI 
does not explain how the projected costs were 
estimated, what assumptions were made and what 
they are based on. Although Annex IV explains that 
the unit costs were based on a review of “EU wide 
evidence” on ecosystem management costs 
including the “study of the costs of implementing 
Target 2 of the EU Biodiversity Strategy (Tucker, et 
al, 2013)” (Annex IV, p. 17), there are no references 
to the Tucker study or systematic references to 
other studies in Annex VI.  
More detailed explanations and 
references have been provided in 
Annex VI. See also further details and 
references on the methodology in 
Annex IV.  
(Checklist 6.3) On the benefit side, Annex IV 
explains that the benefit estimates are based on 
the values from studies estimating carbon 
sequestration and storage benefits and multiple 
ecosystem services. For many ecosystem types 
assessed, they are not referenced or the references 
are incomplete in Annex VI.  
As in opinion 6: references and 
explanations have been added in 
Annex VI. 
(Checklist 6.4) Annex VI should include explanations 
how the costs and benefits were calculated, what 
assumptions were made and what they are based 
on for all ecosystem types assessed. It should also 
better explain how the opportunity costs were 
estimated including what exact assumptions were 
made and how they are justified. It should also be 
clear what “ecosystem services” are included in the 
benefit estimates for each ecosystem type assessed.  
As in opinion 6: more detailed 
explanations have been added in 
Annex VI. 
(Checklist 6.5) The report should clarify to what 
extent the estimates and underlying assumptions 
have been cross-checked with stakeholders. 
As in opinion 6.1  and opinion 7.  
(Checklist 6.6) The benefit cost ratios for some of 
the ecosystems are very low when only the carbon 
benefits are taken into account but they increase, in 
some cases dramatically, when the ecosystem 
As in opinions 6. 
 
Box on robustness of data added in 
Section 6.3, in option 3, conclusions. It

=== Page 17 (selectable text) ===
135 
RSB comments 
How did we address the comment? 
service benefits are included. In view of significant 
differences between the benefit cost ratios with and 
without the ecosystem service benefits, the report 
should explain the risks of the ecosystem service 
benefits being lower than expected.  
refers to annex IV (‘analytical 
methods’)) 
(Checklist 6.7) The report provides some indication 
of how different actors (fishers, farmers, etc) 
would be affected by targets on specific ecosystems 
or habitats. It is not clear what the cumulative 
effects of the initiative would be on them. It is also 
not clear on the distributional impacts between the 
different affected groups. 
As in opinion 7. 
 
(Checklist 6.8) The report should assess (and 
quantify if significant) the administrative costs for 
business (farmers, fishers etc.) and citizens. 
As in opinion 7. 
 
(Checklist 6.9) It is not clear how different the 
efforts to be made by Member States will be, given 
that they have different ecosystems and habitats on 
their respective territories. 
Breakdown of costs per Member State 
and per ecosystem has been added in 
Annex III 
 
(Checklist 6.10) It is also not sufficiently clear on 
how the impact on equality and non-discrimination 
have been considered. Would a transparency 
obligation and access to justice provisions be 
sufficient to ensure those? How big an issue is it in 
this case? 
Text slightly revised, not likely to be a 
big issue for restoration.   
(Checklist 7.1) The assessment of effectiveness, 
coherence and subsidiarity is too important to leave 
entirely to the annexes. If an option will not be 
effective (see box 5 questions about option 2), then 
its efficiency or lack thereof may be of less 
importance. Moreover, coherence is a crucial 
element; thus without providing information on 
how options compare in terms of coherence it is 
difficult to arrive at a meaningful conclusion on how 
the options compare. For instance, how will the 
initiative work together with LULUCF? Will it overlap 
or reinforce or change the scope/measures of any 
of the existing environmental protection pieces of 
legislation? How will the different options interact 
with the future CAP? 
As in opinion 1.3. 
Moved the assessment on 
effectiveness and coherence from 
Annex VIII to Chapter 6.  
Integrated the assessment of 
subsidiarity and proportionality from 
Annex VIII into Chapter 7. 
Expanded the assessment of 
coherence in Chapter 6. 
 
 
 
(Checklist 7.2) It is not clear why the report argues 
in favour of option 4 by stating that ‘having an 
overarching goal makes the objectives more 
achievable’. As mentioned above option 2 de facto 
also concerns (only) a broad range of ecosystems 
and it is difficult to understand how this will help in 
terms of communication or gaining more support as 
stakeholders will notice that the Commission is not 
going at this stage (step 1) for binding targets 
covering all ecosystems. It is not clear from the 
See reply opinion 3.1.  
Explanation added in section 5.2.1 
Option 4. 
Alex: Included in section 6.4 why 
option 4 scores higher on achievability 
than option 3.

=== Page 18 (selectable text) ===
136 
RSB comments 
How did we address the comment? 
analysis whether option 4 will lead to any 
ecosystem covered by a binding target not already 
included in option 3. 
(Checklist 7.3) The choice of preferred option 
should be better explained, including by better 
reflection the shortcomings of option 2. Why would 
option 3 not be sufficient to achieve the goals of the 
initiative? In terms of performance there seems to 
be no significant difference. As said above, the 
higher performance on achievability seems very 
much debatable, and could be argued less positive, 
also in view of the additional complexity (and 
confusion) it may introduce. It is not clear why 
policy options 4 performs better than option 3 in 
terms of proportionality. 
See reply opinion 3.1.  
Weaknesses/shortcomings of option 2 
explained in section 5.2.1. and 6.2. 
Why policy option 4 performs better, 
is now better explained in 6.4. and in 
5.2.1 (Policy option 4) 
 
 
(Checklist 7.4) The report should provide further 
elements to support the claim that a Regulation 
would be better than a Directive as it would 
‘enable coherent action across the EU and is the 
most effective way to ensure rapid action’. The 
implementation under all options is still left to 
Member States through national plans and will still 
rely on a methodology to be developed for the 
monitoring and measuring of progress. How then 
would the choice of instrument make a difference in 
this setup? 
Additional explanation added at the 
end of Chapter 8 (under ‘Legal form’). 
(Checklist 8.1) The report should be explicit about 
when an evaluation would be carried out.  
Periodic review of progress is 
expanded in 5.5.5 
(Checklist 8.2) The report is not sufficiently clear 
about how the overarching target would be 
set/calculated and how it would be monitored. 
Section 9 should be more explicit about whether 
existing legislation requirements would be sufficient 
and if not what gaps would need to be addressed. 
Addressed in Opinion 3.2 
(Checklist 9.1) Stakeholder views are not 
sufficiently integrated throughout the report but 
rather are gathered together in a single section. 
Section 5.4 does not provide absolute numbers, 
only percentages, making it difficult to understand 
the support behind the views presented. It is also 
not clear what other groups besides the citizens 
that were mobilised by NGOs think. It would in 
particular be useful to understand the views of 
those that will be most affected by the initiative 
(Member States, land owners, forest managers, 
farmers, fishers, industry, etc). The different views 
of stakeholder groups should be presented 
throughout the report. 
As in Opinion 8.  
(Checklist 9.2) It is not clear how implementation 
challenges will be addressed with this initiative 
when it is clearly such a crucial element. Without 
See reply opinion 5.1, 5.2

=== Page 19 (selectable text) ===
137 
RSB comments 
How did we address the comment? 
ownership, political commitment and adequate 
funding, the targets will not be reached. The report 
should explain this aspect more clearly.  
Alex: An explanation on the use of 
state aid for restoration is added to 
Annex XII. 
(Checklist 9.3) As mentioned in box 6, the report 
should better explain to what extent the figures and 
cost-benefit analyses it presents are robust and 
what assumptions or estimates were included. It 
should clarify to what extent the estimates and 
underlying assumptions have been cross-checked 
with stakeholders, given the 2050/70 timeline. 
As in option 6.  
(Checklist 9.4) It would be helpful to briefly explain 
in the report (rather than in the annexes) how the 
specific targets were developed. The impacts on 
different actors and the distributional effects across 
Member States should be better explained. 
See answer Opinion 4.1  
(Checklist 10.1) The report should provide the main 
elements to enable the understanding of the 
situation, the context, the problem, objectives and 
options. However, many of the key elements are 
only in the annexes making it sometimes difficult to 
understand the robustness of the analysis. Without 
making the report too long, it would be useful for 
instance to present an example of how the targets 
for a specific ecosystem or habitat have been 
arrived at.  
See responses Opinion 4.1 
 
Annex IV now includes section on how 
targets were arrived at.  
 
(Checklist 10.2) The report should provide more 
explanations to help non-expert readers (e.g. brief 
explanation on MAES, Aichi Target 15, etc.). The 
report does not sufficiently explain the various 
types of actions that would be covered in terms of 
restoration – when is passive restoration enough? 
Can it only be applied in specific situations?  
Explanation added on Aichi target in 
1.1 (in text and footnote). 
Explanation added on MAES (text box) 
in 2.1.1 
 
(Checklist 10.3) The section on the upstream 
support meeting with the RSB and the reproduced 
meeting minutes should be deleted. Only the 
recommendations of the Board opinion(s) and how 
the DG has responded to them need to be reported 
in Annex 1.  
Annex I: Info of upstream RSB meeting 
and related follow-up table of 
comments deleted.  
New follow-up table included. 
(Checklist 10.4) The report should be more 
systematic in presenting the sources when 
providing figures and findings (section 6.3 may rely 
on annexes and in turn on the study but it should 
still show sources for figures it presents). For 
instance, on page 14 it states that ‘costs of inaction 
are high and are anticipated to increase’ – a 
footnote would be better than a hyperlink as this is 
a rather important aspect. More generally, the 
report should use a unique system to reference 
evidence and studies. In many cases, this is done 
through hyperlinks, in other cases in footnotes. As 
Done across the board as much as 
possible.

=== Page 20 (selectable text) ===
138 
RSB comments 
How did we address the comment? 
not everyone consults documents in electronic 
format, the use of footnotes seems preferable. 
(Checklist 10.5) Acronyms should be spelled out at 
first use. 
Done 
(Checklist 10.6) The line spacing should be 
harmonised to the standard 1.15, as foreseen in the 
impact assessment template. 
Done 
(Checklist 10.7) In Figure 3 (p.11), it is not clear why 
the Baltic Sea ecosystem is presented twice, with 
different assessments of its status. 
Fig 3 is replaced by a corrected version 
(one instance of ‘Baltic Sea’ corrected 
into ‘Black Sea’) 
(RSB meeting) Is there evidence that ecosystems 
beyond the HD are degraded and in need of urgent 
restoration? 
MAES, IPBES, Dasgupta and other 
reports showed we have big problems 
beyond Annex I. These are now 
referenced upfront.  
 
RSB comments  in its 2nd Opinion  (28 October 2021) 
How did we address the comment?   
Overall opinion : 
  
The report is not sufficiently clear on the justification, 
functioning and performance of some options.   
Addressed as detailed below. 
The report is not sufficiently specific on some costs and 
benefits estimates and underlying assumptions.  
Addressed as detailed below. 
What to improve:   
 
1. 
The report should better explain how the 
overarching legally binding EU target option would be 
implemented in practice, in particular how effective 
monitoring, reporting and enforcement would be 
ensured.   
Explanation provided on 
implementation in practice, including 
monitoring, reporting and 
enforcement.   
2. 
The report should explain why it uses the 
contribution to climate change as a selection criterion for 
including ecosystems in this initiative. It seems that the 
EU has already sufficient actions to reach its climate 
change goals, independently of an additional 
contribution from this initiative. In particular, the report 
should better justify why it excludes sparsely vegetated 
land (which could have high biodiversity potential) into 
the list of covered ecosystems, while it includes urban 
ecosystems (which would seem to have 2 limited 
biodiversity potential).  
Climate change: importance and 
contribution of ecosystem 
restoration to climate adaptation 
further elaborated on.  
In addition, it was already addressed 
in section 2.1.3 on p18-19  
 
Sparsely vegetated land is no longer 
excluded from the assessement. As it 
was added late, only a partial cost-
benefit analysis could be included.  
3. 
The report should be clearer when it comes to 
the reference condition that ecosystems would need to 
be restored to. It is unclear who would decide on the 
conversion of various habitats and ecosystems and how 
this decision would be made. It should explain how 
trade-offs between (green) policy objectives (e.g. climate 
adaptation flood prevention measures vs restoration) 
will be managed.  
Explanation inserted, in section 4.2 
where reference condition is defined 
and in section 5.2.2 (on NRPs) on re-
establishment.  
 
 
4. 
The report should better justify why it considers 
the option that combines legally binding ecosystem-
specific targets with an overarching objective to be 
Explanations provided as to why 
option 4 is clearly more effective and 
also more proportionate.

=== Page 21 (selectable text) ===
139 
clearly more effective than the specific target option 
only, given that the quantitative comparison scores differ 
only marginally and that the 2030 Biodiversity Strategy 
has already set an overarching aspirational objective. It 
should also better justify why the combination option 
performs significantly better in terms of proportionality.  
5. 
The report should be more specific on some 
costs and benefits estimates and underlying 
assumptions. On benefits, it should be explicit about 
precisely what is meant by ‘ecosystem services’ and the 
timescales for benefits occurring in the medium and long 
term. In view of significant differences between the 
benefit-to-cost ratios with and without the ecosystem 
service benefits, the report should be clear on the risk 
that these benefits will not materialise. On costs, the 
report should clarify the magnitude of the cost increase 
when referring to delayed action on restoration leading 
to a requirement for costlier measures. It should be 
more explicit to what extent it takes into account costs 
to surrounding ecosystems (e.g. effects of re-wetting 
peatland on neighbouring agricultural land).  
The method of estimating benefits of 
ecosystem services is explained in 
section 6.3.   
The types of benefits identified are 
listed per ecosystem.   
The risks that these benefits will not 
be realised are also explained.  
 
An explanation on possible impacts of 
restoration on surrounding 
(agricultural) land has been included 
at the end of section 6.4 and annex 
IV.  
6. 
While the report assumes a ‘realistic’ level of 
implementation for the measures included in the 
baseline, it is not clear whether the same 
implementation assumption has been made when 
estimating the costs and benefits of the options. The 
report has added some useful information on the cost 
implications at Member State level in the annex. It 
should briefly explain in the main text how large the 
difference in effort between Member States would be.  
The implications of less-than-full 
implementation are explained and a 
costs and benefits have been 
calculated for alternative scenarios of 
90%, 80% and 70% implementation.  
 
Cost of implementation at Member 
State level: analysis and explanation 
included at the end of section 6.4.  
7. 
The report should not only report on stakeholder 
views but also show how the input received has 
been taken into account. The Board notes the 
estimated costs and benefits of the preferred option in 
this initiative, as summarised in the attached 
quantification tables.  
In each of the boxes on stakeholder 
views, explanation has been added on 
how this feedback has been taken into 
account.

=== Page 22 (selectable text) ===
140 
Annex II: Stakeholder consultation  
Due to its size, the stakeholder consultation synopsis report is provided as a separate document.

=== Page 23 (selectable text) ===
141 
Annex III: Who is affected and how? 
Practical implications of the initiative 
Restoration of ecosystems has been shown to be cost-effective, but requires 
investment that incurs financial and opportunity costs for managers of land and natural 
resources, who may be compensated through incentives provided by governments and 
buyers of ecosystem services. Restoration programmes will provide employment and 
incomes for ecosystem managers and local communities, restoration and remediation 
businesses, and benefit society and the economy as a whole and sectors which rely 
on particular ecosystem services. 
Social benefits to citizens/society as a whole include new opportunities for jobs and 
skills10, positive effects on physical and mental health11, enhanced natural and cultural 
heritage and identity12, enhanced quality and security of food and water13, 
and enhanced resilience of communities to climate change and natural hazards14. 
A failure to act to address the poor and declining state of ecosystems and their services 
will impact negatively on businesses and citizens across Europe and worldwide, while 
jeopardising the achievement of climate and wider environmental policy goals. 
Who will be affected (see also table III-5):  
 The proposed initiative addresses Member States and thus affects primarily authorities 
at national, regional and local level which play a role in mapping and assessment of 
ecosystems and their services, and in planning, funding, implementing and monitoring 
restoration programmes. Likely affected public institutions include environmental, 
agricultural and climate authorities, statistical offices and research institutes, and 
agencies dealing with zoning and territorial planning. Impacts differ between EU 
Member States and mainly depend on the extent of ecosystems on their territories, the 
levels of degradation and associated magnitude of restoration required, and different 
levels of costs associated with restoring different types of ecosystems. An overview of 
total estimated combined costs of implementing the combined proposed restoration 
targets for Annex I habitats (forests, grasslands, inland and coastal wetlands, rivers & 
lakes and heaths & scrubs) for each EU Member State is provided in Table III-4 below. 
The estimated benefits per Member State widely exceed the costs and are presented in 
Table III-3. The more detailed assessment of costs and benefits per ecosystem are 
provided in Annex VI. Analytical methods in general are explained in Annex IV. 
                                                          
10 The EU biodiversity objectives and the labour market: benefits and identification of skill gaps in the 
current workforce, European Commission, 2012. 
11 The Health and Social Benefits of Nature and Biodiversity Protection, IEEP, 2012. 
12 Natura 2000 Cultural heritage. 
13 See footnote 3. 
14  Ecosystem resilience for mitigation of natural disasters, Nordic Council of Ministers, August 2017.

=== Page 24 (selectable text) ===
142 
 Land managers – including farmers, foresters and nature conservationists – are 
responsible for the management and restoration of terrestrial ecosystems.  The impacts  
on them can be expected to be both one-off and recurrent, with land managers expected 
to be impacted by one-off costs (as shown in Table III-5 below) relating to potential, 
initial changes in land use management practices. Furthermore, the scale of impacts on 
land managers varies considerably between ecosystems and habitats, and between 
biogeographic regions. For example for forests, approximately 40 % of the forest area 
in the EU is publicly owned, and public ownership dominates in most of the Eastern 
and South-Eastern Member States. As such, incentives to stimulate both private and 
public actors to implement restorative actions within contrasting Member States will 
also vary. To incentivise restorative actions by land managers throughout the 
ecosystems analysed within this Impact Assessment, costs such as those involved in 
restoration actions, opportunity costs relating possible changes in land use (such as 
agricultural land impacted by freshwater barrier removals), and changes in the costs 
related to marketable goods and services all need to be considered (see methodology 
in Annex IV).   
 A range of sectors using and harvesting natural resources – such as fisheries, the water 
sector and the extractive industries play an important role in sustainable management 
and restoration.  For most of the ecosystems outlined in Table III-5, it can be expected 
that significant one-off and recurrent costs will be imposed on these stakeholders. In 
ecosystems which are more intensely managed for resource extraction (such as forests), 
changes towards ‘nature-based’ or ‘climate smart’ management would to some degree 
depend on the willingness, know-how and adaptability of the sectors. However, 
extractive industries can also be expected to benefit from restoration actions, such as 
reduced costs to water purification from reduced water pollution (due to agro-
ecosystem and freshwater ecosystem enhanced conditions), enhanced recreation-
related revenues, and improved resilience against climate-related impacts. 
 Sectors responsible for emissions and discharges to land and water – such as the 
manufacturing, energy, transport, agriculture and waste treatment sectors – play an 
important role in enhancing the condition of ecosystems through reduced point source 
and diffuse pollution.  Across all ecosystems, these sectors can be expected to be 
impacted by restoration needs and actions, to abide to the Polluter Pays Principle. 
However, as outlined in the bullet below, the costs of complying with environmental 
regulation can be balanced by a multitude of benefits derived from restoration actions. 
 A wide range of sectors and stakeholders benefit from enhancements in ecosystem 
services.  For example, the agri-food sector benefits from an improved condition of 
soils, water resources and conservation of pollinators; fisheries benefit from enhanced 
fish stocks and more sustainable marine and freshwater management; water companies 
benefit from enhanced water purification; property owners, insurers as well as 
inhabitants benefit from reductions in floods and natural hazards; and the tourism 
sector benefits from enhanced landscape and biodiversity. Cost-efficiencies can be 
garnered by such sectors through investing in restoration and nature-based solutions to

=== Page 25 (selectable text) ===
143 
comply with environmental legislation whilst also lowering medium-long term 
operating costs. For example, through investing in improving freshwater condition, the 
availability of resources extracted from such ecosystems (such as clean water for 
industrial processes) can be enhanced which can lower operating costs and reduce the 
likelihood of resource scarcity in the future. 
 Society as a whole benefits from increased climate change mitigation and adaptation 
and from improved disaster risk management. 
 The financial sector can contribute to restoration and is also subject to the risks posed 
to the economy by biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation, as its investments can 
be highly dependent on ecosystem services.  
Finally, it should be noted that a plethora of tools are currently in place for stakeholders to 
utilise to achieve the outlined restoration targets in the coming years. In particular, to 
support the transition to enhanced ecosystem condition and to compensate the stakeholders 
noted above who may experience foregone income, incentive payments and opportunity 
costs can be compensated through EU, national, regional, local and private funds. For 
example, existing payments under the CAP already link payments related to environmental 
conditions. Such payments can be expected to further increase in their scope and scale due 
to the enhanced budget under the Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF) towards 
climate and biodiversity issues. Besides the agreement to invest at least 25% of the EU’s 
expenditure in measures that contribute to climate action, by 2024 7.5% of MFF annual 
spending is to be directed towards biodiversity objectives - and 10% as from 2026, which 
will alleviate the costs of transition required by stakeholders to achieve restoration targets. 
Implementing EU restoration targets would provide a direct contribution to both 
mainstreaming targets.

=== Page 26 (selectable text) ===
144 
Summary of costs and benefits 
Table III-1: Overview of benefits of the preferred option – until 2070 
 
Overview of benefits for the preferred option – until 2070 (Present Value) 
 
Scenario A  (15-40-100% targets for 
2030-2040-2050) 
 
Scenario B  (30-60-100% targets for 
2030-2040-2050) 
 
Restoration of 
ecosystem type 
Carbon benefits 
in EUR million   
Benefits from all 
ecosystem services 
(including carbon) 
in EUR million 
 
Carbon benefits 
in EUR million 
Benefits from all 
ecosystem services 
(including carbon) 
in EUR million 
Beneficiaries and further comments  
Peatlands 
10 629  
38 702 
 
13 042 
47 488 
- 
Entire population and economy through carbon 
benefits; 
- 
Companies and consumers, and the tourism sector. 
Marshlands  
(na) 
6 388 
 
(na) 
7 838 
Coastal wetlands 
 
1 091 
181 614 
 
1 339 
222 842 
- 
EU inhabitants, especially 55.7 million people who 
are estimated to live in coastal zones by 2060; 
- 
Fishers and farmers as well as related value chains. 
Forests  
3 832 
203 564 
 
4 701 
249 775  
- 
The economy, including tourism/ recreation sectors, 
and conservation organisations, especially in rural 
economies. 
Agro-ecosystems 
17 073 
229 589 
 
18 624 
250 451 
- 
Farmers and the agricultural sector benefit from 
improved soils quality, reduced soil erosion and soil 
compaction, greater abundance of pollinators, etc.  
Steppe, heath and 
scrub 
 
3 971  
24 191  
 
4 722  
28 768  
- 
Tourism sector, farmers. 
- 
Society and the economy, through the delivery of 
enhanced ecosystem services 
Rivers, lakes and 
alluvial habitats  
 
(na) 
862 349 
 
(na) 
1 053 042 
- 
Local populations through increased safety and house 
prices due to decreased flood risk potential 
- 
Water suppliers and consumers through overall 
reduced water pollution and increased availability 
- 
Recreational users of freshwater ecosystems through 
greater access to previously restricted areas (due to 
barrier removal) and enhanced aesthetic values 
- 
Society at large through enhanced ecosystem 
services.

=== Page 27 (selectable text) ===
145 
 
Overview of benefits for the preferred option – until 2070 (Present Value) 
 
Scenario A  (15-40-100% targets for 
2030-2040-2050) 
 
Scenario B  (30-60-100% targets for 
2030-2040-2050) 
 
Sub-total  
36 596 
1 546 397 
 
42 428 
1 860 204 
This excludes benefits for non-Annex I habitats as well as 
marine, urban, soils and pollinators.  
Marine  
(na) 
(na) 
 
(na) 
(na) 
No monetary estimates available. However, EU citizens 
and economic sectors (e.g. fishing/ aquaculture/ tourism/ 
energy)  benefit in terms of climate change mitigation as 
well as improved biodiversity, water quality and land and 
seascapes. 
Urban  
(na) 
(na) 
 
(na) 
(na) 
No monetary estimates available. However, urban dwellers 
would experience benefits in terms of  flood prevention, 
biodiversity, human health, property values, air and water 
pollution as well as climate (e.g. heat control) 
Soils  
(na) 
(na) 
 
(na) 
(na) 
No monetary estimates available. However, citizens and 
farmers would experience benefits in terms of climate 
change mitigation, biodiversity, flood risk mitigation, 
water quality control, sustainable use of rewetted land, 
erosion control, increased crop yields and productivity, 
soil organic carbon, and soil fertility 
Pollinators  
(na) 
(na) 
 
(na) 
(na) 
No monetary estimates available. However, EU citizens, 
farmers and related supply chains as well as beekeepers 
would experience benefits in terms of crop and plant 
pollination, natural biological control, decomposition of 
organic matter, tourism, and culture and aesthetics. 
 
Notes:  
- 
The general method for assessing the benefits is described in Annex IV. Details of the calculations for the individual ecosystem types are provided in 
Annex VI. 
- 
Benefits until 2070 are given to take into account the benefits from restoration measures undertaken up to 2050, especially in the final years, of which 
benefits would only be visible beyond 2050.  The figures presented are the sum of the present value of annual benefits flows, applying a social 
discount rate of 4%.

=== Page 28 (selectable text) ===
146 
- 
The overview includes monetary estimates for benefits for many of the ecosystem services, depending on the availability of monetary data. Estimates 
are mostly only possible for HD Annex I habitats, because of the difficulty of quantifying the extent of ecosystem restoration needed for other 
ecosystems.  This means that the benefits for targets that extend beyond Annex I are not included, among which, marine, urban, soils and pollinators.  
- 
Moreover, some benefits of ecosystem services are difficult, if not impossible, to be captured in monetary terms for all the ecosystem categories, such 
as the intrinsic value of nature and species, moral, aesthetic, spiritual and socio-cultural benefits and relational values with nature.15 These can be 
important and sometimes decisive in decision making and need to be considered in addition to the monetary benefits.  
- 
Annex VI provides for some ecosystem types a range of minimum and maximum monetary benefits; in such instances the overview above includes 
the average.   
- 
Although the 2050 target aims to restore 100 % of the habitat, the estimation of costs and benefits is for 90 % restoration as this is the maximum 
percentage that can be expected in practice for most ecosystems.  
 
Table III-2: Overview of costs of the preferred option – until 2070 (Present Value) 
Overview of costs for the preferred option – until 2070  
Action 
One-off 
costs in EUR 
million 
Annual costs in 
EUR million 
Total in EUR 
million for 
scenario A 
 
Total in EUR 
million for 
scenario B 
Comments 
 
Costs for restoration and maintenance per ecosystem type for both Member States and businesses  
Peatlands  
 
 
4 779 
 
5 125 
These restoration and maintenance costs include re-creation 
costs and foregone income losses for businesses for Annex I 
habitats.  
 
The sub-total excludes non-Annex I habitats as well as 
marine, urban, soils and pollinators. 
Marshlands 
 
 
3 643 
 
 
 
3 721 
Coastal wetlands 
 
 
5 141 
 
5 852 
Forests 
 
 
50 082 
 
53 850  
Agro-ecosystems 
 
 
26 559 
 
27 732 
Steppe, heath and scrub 
 
 
               3 051  
 
        3 111  
Rivers, lakes and alluvial 
habitats 
 
 
35 232 
 
40 211 
Sub-total  
 
 
128 487 
 
139 602 
                                                          
15 See the following resources for more information: Valuing nature’s contributions to people: the IPBES approach - ScienceDirect; 
EUNCA_SynthReport_4_2_CSERGE_Year2_190115_sent.pdf (europa.eu); The IPBES Preliminary Guide on Multiple Values of Nature (aboutvalues.net)

=== Page 29 (selectable text) ===
147 
Overview of costs for the preferred option – until 2070  
Action 
One-off 
costs in EUR 
million 
Annual costs in 
EUR million 
Total in EUR 
million for 
scenario A 
 
Total in EUR 
million for 
scenario B 
Comments 
Marine, urban, soils, 
pollinators 
 
 
(na) 
 
(na) 
Quantitative cost estimates are not available 
 
Costs for enabling measures for Member States 
Surveys of ecosystems   
 
1 099 
  
 
 
 
 
Development of national 
restoration plans 
12.8 
  
 
 
 
 
Development of 
methodologies and 
indicators (5 
ecosystems)  
6.6 
  
 
 
 
 
Administration of 
restoration measures 
  
438.3 
 
 
 
 
Monitoring of restored 
ecosystems   
  
20.6 
 
 
 
 
Reporting progress 
against restoration 
targets  
  
0.1 
 
 
 
 
Sub-total   
1 118.4 
459 
 
 
 
 
Costs from 2022 to 2050 
1 118.4 
12 854 
13 972.4 
 
13 972.4 
 
 
Total costs: restoration, maintenance and enabling measures 
Total  
 
 
142 459.4 
 
153 574.4 
This excludes restoration and maintenance costs for non-
Annex I habitats, and marine, urban, soils and pollinators, as 
well as opportunity costs of potential land use changes (e.g. 
turning grassland into an industrial site). 
Notes:  
- 
The general method for assessing the costs is described in Annex IV. Details of the calculations for the individual ecosystem types are provided in 
Annex VI and for the enabling measures/administrative impacts in Annex VII section 4.

=== Page 30 (selectable text) ===
148 
- 
 All cost ‘actions’ are foreseen to be undertaken up to 2050, except for maintenance costs, which extend to 2070. The figures presented represent the 
sum of the present value of annual costs, applying a 4% annual social discount rate.  
- 
Monetary figures can mostly only be estimated for HD Annex I habitats, because of the difficulty of quantifying the extent of action required for other 
ecosystems, which means that the costs for targets that extend beyond Annex I are not included, among which, costs for and marine, urban, soils and 
pollinators.  
- 
Costs for enabling measures are given only for scenario A but are foreseen to be virtually the same for scenario B; under scenario B most of these costs 
would be borne in earlier years whereas under scenario A more costs would be borne later. In Annex XII the average of both scenario A and B is taken 
to arrive at a total estimate of costs, which means that the total cost figures may differ slightly from figures in this table.  
- 
More precise cost figures for each ecosystem can be found in Annex VI. Annex VI provides for some ecosystem types a range of minimum and 
maximum costs; in such instances the overview above includes the average.   
- 
A qualitative assessment of costs for different stakeholder groups is provided in table III-5. 
 
 
Table III-3: Estimated annual benefits of Ecosystem Restoration and Maintenance, by Member State, 2022-2050 (€m) 
 
The table presents estimates of annual benefits of ecosystem restoration and maintenance over the 2022-2050 period, for those ecosystems for 
which full benefits assessments have been made, and for which data on the extent and condition of ecosystems in each Member State are available.  
The benefits estimates presented are those under the option to restore 15% of ecosystems by 2030, 40% by 2040 and 90% by 2050.  The benefits 
are greater under the 30%, 60% and 90% option, because earlier restoration of ecosystems delivers larger aggregate benefits over the 2022-2050 
period. The benefits estimate breakdowns are based on data provided by the European Environment Agency on the extent of each ecosystem in 
each Member State. 
The figures exclude estimates for Romania, owing to uncertainties regarding the true extent and condition of ecosystems in that Member State. 
The benefits estimates relate to the increase in total ecosystem services for each ecosystem. As they are expressed as annual averages to 2050, they 
give slightly different benefit cost ratios than obtained by comparing the present value of benefits and costs to 2070. 
The aggregate benefits across these seven ecosystem types average €64 billion per annum for the EU27.  The largest benefits are enjoyed by France 
(€14.6bn), Finland (€9.7bn) and Spain (€7.9bn) the Member States with the largest areas of these ecosystems. The distribution of benefits differs 
slightly from costs, as the benefit cost ratios for some ecosystems (e.g. coastal wetlands and freshwaters) are higher than for others (e.g. forests), 
so Member States with the largest area of those high benefit ecosystems benefit disproportionately.

=== Page 31 (selectable text) ===
149 
There are significant variations in the costs for different ecosystems across Member States, with the distribution of benefits mirroring that for costs, 
as discussed in Table III-4 below.  
Factors affecting the overall benefit estimates by Member States are: 
 The extent of each ecosystem in each Member State, particularly for ecosystems with high benefit cost ratios such as coastal wetlands and 
freshwaters; 
 The condition of each ecosystem in each Member State. Some Member States (e.g. Austria, Germany, Greece, Italy, Sweden) have 
relatively large areas of some ecosystems but also record a relatively small proportion to be in not-good condition, such that benefits of 
restoration and maintenance are relatively low compared to ecosystem area.

=== Page 32 (selectable text) ===
150 
 
Coastal wetlands 
Freshwaters 
Forests 
Grasslands 
Heath, steppe & 
scrub 
Peatlands 
Total 
AT 
 7  
 690  
 47  
 27  
 1  
 1  
 774  
BE 
 16  
 494  
 84  
 35  
 -    
 2  
 631  
BG 
 17  
 306  
 0  
 288  
 18  
 0  
 630  
CY 
 1  
 17  
 17  
 1  
 2  
 -    
 38  
CZ 
 0  
 242  
 44  
 74  
 -    
 1  
 361  
DE 
 731  
 1,594  
 89  
 166  
 1  
 13  
 2,595  
DK 
 2,271  
 761  
 49  
 79  
 -    
 10  
 3,171  
EE 
 6  
 380  
 23  
 25  
 -    
 15  
 449  
ES 
 426  
 1,932  
 2,209  
 2,851  
 515  
 6  
 7,939  
FI 
 381  
 7,327  
 613  
 5  
 272  
 1,094  
 9,694  
FR 
 854  
 7,517  
 3,350  
 2,752  
 93  
 52  
 14,618  
GR 
 352  
 154  
 18  
 14  
 3  
 -    
 541  
HR 
 0  
 352  
 1  
 269  
 -    
 0  
 622  
HU 
 300  
 785  
 136  
 170  
 0  
 1  
 1,392  
IE 
 437  
 1,259  
 1  
 144  
 4  
 76  
 1,922  
IT 
 87  
 1,626  
 236  
 437  
 33  
 5  
 2,424  
LT 
 -    
 1,001  
 25  
 41  
 -    
 15  
 1,081  
LU 
 -    
 3  
 0  
 29  
 -    
 -    
 32  
LV 
 15  
 471  
 27  
 82  
 -    
 17  
 611  
MT 
 0  
 0  
 -    
 1  
 1  
 -    
 2  
NL 
 894  
 123  
 6  
 30  
 -    
 2  
 1,056  
PL 
 496  
 4,124  
 316  
 1,020  
 1  
 24  
 5,981  
PT 
 3  
 43  
 26  
 766  
 67  
 11  
 915  
RO 
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
SE 
 228  
 4,191  
 802  
 400  
 -    
 260  
 5,881  
SI 
 0  
 226  
 116  
 73  
 1  
 0  
 415  
SK 
 0  
 97  
 195  
 179  
 2  
 0  
 473

=== Page 33 (selectable text) ===
151 
EU 27 
 7,522  
 35,715  
 8,431  
 9,963  
 1,015  
 1,603  
 64,249  
 
Table III-4: Estimated annual costs of Ecosystem Restoration and Maintenance, by Member State, 2022-2050 (€m) 
 
The table presents estimates of annual costs of ecosystem restoration and maintenance over the 2022-2050 period, for those ecosystems for which 
full cost estimates have been made, and for which data on the extent and condition of ecosystems in each Member State are available.  The cost 
estimates presented are those under the option to restore 15% of ecosystems by 2030, 40% by 2040 and 90% by 2050.  The average annual costs 
for the 30%, 60% and 90% option are similar, but they are more evenly phased over the period. The cost breakdowns are based on data provided 
by the European Environment Agency on the extent of each ecosystem in each Member State. 
The figures exclude estimates for Romania, owing to uncertainties regarding the true extent and condition of ecosystems in that Member State. 
The aggregate costs across these seven ecosystem types average €7.4 billion per annum for the EU27.  The largest costs are incurred in France 
(€2.1bn), Spain (€1.5bn) and Finland (€0.9bn), the Member States with the largest areas of these ecosystems. 
There are significant variations in the costs for different ecosystems across Member States.  For example, the largest costs for each ecosystem are, 
in order of magnitude, as follows: 
 Coastal wetlands - Denmark, the Netherlands, France and Germany; 
 Fresh waters – France and Finland; 
 Forests – France and Spain; 
 Grasslands – Spain and France; 
 Heath, steppe and scrub – Spain and Finland; 
 Peatlands – Finland and Sweden. 
Factors affecting the overall cost estimates by Member States are: 
 The extent of each ecosystem in each Member State;

=== Page 34 (selectable text) ===
152 
 The condition of each ecosystem in each Member State. Some Member States (e.g. Austria, Germany, Greece, Italy, Sweden) have 
relatively large areas of some ecosystems but also record a relatively small proportion to be in not-good condition, such that costs of 
restoration and maintenance are relatively low compared to ecosystem area.   
 
 
Coastal wetlands 
Freshwaters 
Forests 
Grasslands 
Heath, steppe & 
scrub 
Peatlands 
Total 
AT 
0.3 
44.0 
15.5 
4.1 
0.4 
0.2 
64.5 
BE 
0.7 
31.5 
27.5 
5.2 
- 
0.3 
65.3 
BG 
0.7 
19.5 
0.0 
43.5 
5.6 
0.0 
69.4 
CY 
0.1 
1.1 
5.4 
0.2 
0.6 
- 
7.3 
CZ 
0.0 
15.4 
14.2 
11.2 
- 
0.1 
41.0 
DE 
31.6 
101.6 
29.1 
25.0 
0.4 
1.9 
189.6 
DK 
98.2 
48.5 
16.0 
11.9 
- 
1.5 
176.2 
EE 
0.2 
24.2 
7.4 
3.8 
- 
2.2 
38.0 
ES 
18.4 
123.1 
720.6 
430.3 
157.6 
0.9 
1 450.9 
FI 
16.5 
467.0 
200.1 
0.8 
83.3 
163.5 
931.2 
FR 
36.9 
479.1 
1 092.7 
415.4 
28.5 
7.7 
2 060.3 
GR 
15.2 
9.8 
5.8 
2.2 
1.0 
- 
34.0 
HR 
0.0 
22.4 
0.3 
40.6 
- 
0.0 
63.4 
HU 
13.0 
50.0 
44.5 
25.7 
0.1 
0.2 
133.4 
IE 
18.9 
80.2 
0.5 
21.8 
1.2 
11.3 
134.0 
IT 
3.7 
103.7 
76.9 
65.9 
10.2 
0.7 
261.1 
LT 
- 
63.8 
8.1 
6.3 
- 
2.2 
80.3 
LU 
- 
0.2 
0.0 
4.3 
- 
- 
4.5 
LV 
0.6 
30.0 
8.9 
12.4 
- 
2.5 
54.4 
MT 
0.0 
0.0 
- 
0.2 
0.2 
- 
0.4 
NL 
38.7 
7.8 
2.0 
4.6 
- 
0.3 
53.4 
PL 
21.4 
262.8 
103.1 
154.0 
0.3 
3.6 
545.3 
PT 
0.1 
2.7 
8.4 
115.7 
20.4 
1.6 
148.9 
RO 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-

=== Page 35 (selectable text) ===
153 
SE 
9.9 
267.1 
261.5 
60.4 
- 
38.8 
637.6 
SI 
0.0 
14.4 
37.7 
11.0 
0.2 
0.1 
63.3 
SK 
0.0 
6.2 
63.6 
27.0 
0.6 
0.1 
97.5 
EU 27 
325.2 
2 276.3 
2 749.8 
1 503.6 
310.5 
239.6 
7 405.0 
 
Table III-5: Costs for different stakeholders 
Darker blue indicates higher costs: significant-, moderate- and some impact (non-monetary costs/impacts are also taken into account).  
 
 
  
  
Public Authorities 
Farming/forestry sectors 
Fishing sector 
Nature Managers 
One-off 
Recurrent 
One-off 
Recurrent 
One-off 
Recurrent 
One-Off 
Recurrent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inland wetlands 
and peatlands 
Re-wetting at least 25  % 
of HD Annex I peatland 
habitat area degraded due 
to drainage  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Restore all HD Annex I 
peatland habitat area to 
good condition 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Re-create the area 
necessary to achieve 
Favourable Conservation 
Status of HD Annex I 
peatlands  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Restore and re-create 
area to improve status of 
EU-protected species 
associated with inland 
wetlands and peatlands

=== Page 36 (selectable text) ===
154 
Peatland converted to 
cropland- Reduce by 
15 % the area of 
managed or drained 
organic soils that are 
losing carbon  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Forests 
Restore all HD Annex I 
forest habitat area to 
good condition 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Restore and re-create 
area to achieve FCS of 
EU protected species 
associated with forests  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Restore degraded non-
Annex 1 habitats forest 
area to a good condition 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Steppe, heath 
and scrub 
Restore all HD Annex I 
steppe, heath and scrub 
habitats to good 
condition 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Re-create habitat area 
required to achieve FCS 
of HD Annex I steppe, 
heath and scrub habitats  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Maintain, restore and re-
create steppe, heath and 
scrub habitats as 
necessary to achieve FCS 
of EU protected species 
associated with steppe, 
heath and scrub  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Agro-
ecosystems 
Restore all HD Annex I 
agricultural habitats to 
good condition

=== Page 37 (selectable text) ===
155 
Re-create additional 
habitat area required to 
achieve FCS of HD 
Annex I agricultural 
habitats  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Restore and recreate 
agro-ecosystems as 
necessary to increase the 
populations of common 
farmland birds as 
measured by the 
common farmland bird 
indicator  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Restore and recreate 
agro-ecosystems as 
necessary to achieve the 
secure status of birds that 
are predominantly 
associated with agro-
ecosystems 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Maintain, restore and re-
create agro-ecosystems 
as necessary to achieve 
FCS of EU protected 
species associated with 
agro-ecosystems 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Restore or recreate semi-
modified and seminatural 
grassland  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Restore or recreate 
unploughed / untilled 
grassland to replace 
historic losses  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Rivers, lakes 
and alluvial 
habitats 
Restore all HD Annex I 
freshwater and alluvial 
habitat area to good 
condition

=== Page 38 (selectable text) ===
156 
Re-create area as 
necessary to achieve FCS 
of HD Annex I rivers, 
lakes, and alluvial 
habitats  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Develop an inventory of 
barriers to longitudinal 
and lateral connectivity 
of rivers and a detailed 
plan of which barriers 
will be removed, to 
achieve free-flowing 
status where possible and 
necessary to restore the 
habitats depending on 
such connectivity 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Mapping out of small 
water units, identify their 
restoration and recreation 
potential and assess their 
contribution to improve 
connectivity between 
habitats as part of high 
diversity landscape 
features, contributing to 
the restoration of habitats 
and species. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marine 
Restore  EU marine 
habitats, prioritizing 
Annex I habitats.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Coastal 
wetlands 
Restore all HD Annex I 
wetland habitat to good 
condition 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Re-create area as 
necessary to achieve FCS 
of Annex I wetland 
habitats

=== Page 39 (selectable text) ===
157 
Restore and re-create the 
area to enhance the 
conservation status of 
EU protected species 
associated with coastal 
wetlands 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Urban 
No net loss of green 
urban space, including 
tree canopy cover, by 
2030, compared to 2021, 
within each LAU 
containing cities, towns 
and suburbs; A national 
average increase in the 
area represented by green 
urban space, including 
tree canopy cover, across 
LAUs containing cities, 
towns and suburbs, of at 
least 3% of the total area 
of these LAUs by 2040 
and at least 5% of the 
total area of these LAUs 
by 2050, compared to 
2021. 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
A minimum of 10% tree 
canopy cover in each 
LAU containing cities, 
towns and suburbs by 
2050. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Soils 
Package of measures to 
conserve and increase 
SOC in organic soils 
under agricultural use 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
Package of measures 
focused on improving 
SOC on forest soil

=== Page 40 (selectable text) ===
158 
Pollinators 
Target to restore 30-60-
90  % of Annex I habitats 
to good condition in 
grasslands, heaths and 
scrub, wetlands, and 
forests categories, with 
no additional actions 
specifically targeted at 
pollinator conservation 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Target to reverse trends 
in pollinators listed in the 
EU Habitats Directive 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
All necessary restoration 
and re-creation actions 
taken to restore 
pollinator populations by 
2030, including through 
the following 
intermediate actions:

=== Page 41 (selectable text) ===
159 
 
Annex IV: Analytical methods 
For many ecosystems there are data gaps and it can be difficult to specify all aspects of an 
ecosystem to a high degree of accuracy – rather, it is possible to make key observations, 
identify salient features, predict trends, estimate risks and costs and benefits, based on a 
range of sources. This can be in contrast to other policy areas where more information is 
readily available in numerical, monetary form, or where extensive simulation models exist, 
in areas such as climate change. This underlines the need to anchor work on the best 
available data sources. These include information resulting from the reporting 
requirements the Birds- and Habitats Directives (BHD), Water Framework Directive 
(WFD), and the Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD), as well as the work on the 
Mapping and Assessment of Ecosystem Services (MAES), and others.  
It is for these reasons that this impact assessment is based on a balance of qualitative and 
quantitative approaches and estimates, both in the development of the baseline and trends, 
as well as the costs and benefits of specific options. This is in keeping with many reports 
on the state and evolution of nature or ecosystems. Moreover, when it comes to making 
estimates of costs and benefits, as outlined in chapter 6 and annexes VI and XII, this can 
only partially be based on numerical values and numerical monetary estimates. This is not 
only due to the lack of data of certain costs and benefits, but also because some of the 
values of nature may not be reducible to monetary terms alone. 
 
Evidence base and methodology to develop the specific targets:  
The following describes how the evidence base and methodology used to develop the 
specific targets, and how stakeholder views  were integrated in the process:  
1. A first workshop with EU Member State experts in December 2020 provided 
evidence of the need and support for both an overarching target/objective, as well 
as specific targets focussing on specific ecosystems or species groups.  
2. To develop specific targets that would address practically all ecosystems in a 
systematic manner, it was decided to use a categorisation of main ecosystem types 
in the EU. This was based on extensive work of MAES (Mapping and Assessment 
of Ecosystems and their Services), which categorises the main ecosystem types in 
the EU and reviews their state, trends, services and the pressures they are exposed 
to. 
3. Some proposals for specific targets had already been developed and were described 
in the Biodiversity Strategy for 2030, for example on reversing the decline of 
pollinators, or that fee flowing rivers should be restored.  
4. A stakeholder workshop was held in February 2021 to explore initial ideas for 
targets for each of the main ecosystem types, based on the requirement defined in

=== Page 42 (selectable text) ===
160 
the Biodiversity Strategy to 2030. At the workshop only some initial concepts for 
further targets emerged; however, there was confirmation that targets for specific 
ecosystem types were needed, and that these, if possible, should be based on areas 
to be restored. Some stakeholder groups had developed more detailed ideas for 
topics for specific targets in background papers, in particular by environmental 
NGOs (e.g. WWF, the EEB and Birdlife International). 
5. Building on the above, a number of meetings were held to discuss the specific 
targets making use of extensive in-house DG Environment expertise, for all 
ecosystem types. This helped develop further concepts for targets such as on free-
flowing rivers, marine ecosystems, wetlands, forests, heathland and scrub, soils, 
urban and others. Targets relating to Annex I habits tended to fall into one group 
with similar characteristics, and non-Annex one related targets into another. This 
was because extensive data is available for Annex I related targets, and less so for 
the other group.  
6. Meetings were also held with the EEA and the JRC on suggestions across the range 
of potential specific targets.  
7. DG Environment then made an analysis and listing of the various targets proposed. 
Subsequently, requests were made to the EEA and the JRC to further assist with 
the descriptions and definitions of these. For example, requests for the EEA to 
develop fiches on Annex I related targets estimating area potential percentage 
based on MS data. The JRC also contributed to developing fiches for targets for 
other ecosystems such as for soils and urban ecosystems. Based on this a list and 
detailed description of targets to be impact assessed was developed and forwarded 
to the contractor for further analysis.  
8. Some adjustments and fine-tuning to all these targets were also made with the 
contractors as part of the impact assessment study. As part of the study, an analysis 
fiche was developed for each main ecosystem type and for all targets proposed 
therein. 
9. A second stakeholder workshop held in April further explored views on definitions 
and the need for an overarching target.  
10. To gain further feedback on the targets from stakeholders, the specific targets were 
presented to stakeholders at a third stakeholder workshop in May 2021. At this 
workshop, no objections were raised to the targets proposed, however several 
questions remained on their detailed form and their foreseen implementation. 
Therefore a fourth stakeholder workshop in September 2021 provided for an 
overall presentation or all the targets and more detailed feedback on the specific 
targets proposed.  
 
Approach to thematic assessments:  
Given the significant differences in the characteristics of broad ecosystem types, their 
condition and restoration needs, and required measures to meet them, at the start of the 
impact assessment process the assessment was subdivided in ten thematic areas. For each

=== Page 43 (selectable text) ===
161 
of them a targeted impact assessment was undertaken in line with guidance on impact 
assessments in the EU better regulation toolbox. The selection of these areas was based on 
the 12 broad ecosystem types under the MAES typology, with some slight modifications: 
Grassland and cropland were merged in a single assessment for agro-ecosystems, and 
wetlands were split into two separate assessments for inland wetlands (marshland and 
peatland) and coastal wetlands (in which marine inlets and transitional waters were 
included). For (deeper) coastal, marine shelf and open ocean ecosystems a single marine 
assessment was undertaken. Sparsely-vegetated lands were excluded from the assessment 
for their relatively low relevance for the objectives of the legally-binding initiative. In 
addition, two more cross-cutting thematic assessments were added for soil ecosystems and 
pollinators given their particular importance in supporting healthy ecosystems.  
In close cooperation between experts from the European Commission (including the JRC), 
EEA and the contractor preparing the impact assessment study, for each ecosystem type 
the current extent, condition, and high-impact pressures and threats were identified through 
desktop study (seen Annex VI and VIII). For the baseline assessment, informed 
assumptions were then made on their likely future development including through 
modelling trends of the last 10-20 years towards 2030 in line with the EU Ecosystem 
Assessment. Where necessary these were further underpinned by detailed reporting data 
especially from the State of Nature Reporting (Art 12 Birds Directive & Art 17 Habitats 
Directive), reporting under the WFD (in the case of rivers & lakes and coastal wetlands) 
and MSFD (in the case of the marine assessment) as well as other sources such as other 
EU-wide environmental indicators on relevant pressures and threats such as climate change 
effects, water- and air pollution. In addition, baseline assessments for each ecosystem type 
included an evaluation of realistic levels of restoration action to be expected towards 2030 
(and in more general terms 2040 and 2050) for example in the framework of the above-
mentioned EU Directives. This information was obtained from extensive evidence on 
progress made in restoration in the evaluation of the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020, 
implementation reports, recent fitness checks of EU nature- and water legislation, findings 
from implementing the EU Action Plan for Nature, People and the Economy, recent impact 
assessment studies of related initiatives such as the EU climate law and -adaptation 
strategy, evaluation reports of key cross-cutting policies such as the EU’s Common 
Agricultural- and Fisheries policies, recent evidence on nature and green infrastructure 
investment plans of Member Status outlined in the Prioritised Action Frameworks for 
Natura 2000, foresight studies on the development of key socio-economic trends such as 
urbanisation and rural depopulation as well as on key economic sectors such as agriculture 
and forestry, and expert judgement on the impact of recent EU decisions for example on 
the EU’s Multi-annual Financial Framework (MFF).  
Given the large diversity of restoration needs and -challenges within each broad ecosystem 
type, and possible target options to address them, a screening exercise was undertaken to 
identify the most suitable ones. This screening involved a first assessment on the relevance 
to the three core objectives of the legally-binding initiative: Biodiversity (primary) and 
climate change mitigation- and adaptation (secondary), as well as the enforceability of 
target options (e.g. is a target based on existing legal commitment) and a preliminary cost-

=== Page 44 (selectable text) ===
162 
benefit analysis. Based on this assessment, target options were screened in or out. Where 
possible, targets were considered that could build on existing EU-wide legal commitments 
and the monitoring & reporting systems underpinning them, especially under the Nature 
Directives, the MSFD and WFD. For screened-in targets, a second assessment was made 
if the target could be introduced immediately (‘Step 1’ target) or whether it would require 
more preparatory work e.g. on definitions, indicators, monitoring & evaluation, baseline 
etc. (‘Step 2’). On target options shortlisted for ‘Step 1’, a detailed impact assessment was 
undertaken. After the short-listing of viable options, a selection was made of combinations 
of target options that were as much as possible complementary and mutually exclusive, to 
avoid overlap in assessment of impacts as much as possible in case of combined targets.  
In the thematic assessments, the costs and benefits of meeting each short-listed target for 
Step 1 were then quantified in monetary terms as far as possible. The estimation of costs 
and benefits for the different restoration targets is based on available evidence in scientific 
literature on the key costs and benefits of the different measures that can or must be taken 
to achieve the restoration target. References to these sources of evidence are provided in 
the supporting thematic assessments. The analysis is thus not based on any particular 
simulation or predictive model.  
Quantitative Assessment: The cost analysis involved estimating the areas of each 
ecosystem requiring restoration, re-creation and maintenance, taking into account a 
baseline assessment of pressures, planned environmental actions and other drivers of 
change to 2030. The areas requiring restoration, re-creation and maintenance were then 
multiplied by an appropriate unit cost per hectare. The unit costs employed were based on 
a review of EU wide evidence on ecosystem management costs. The most comprehensive 
source of data was the study of the costs of implementing Target 2 of the EU Biodiversity 
Strategy (Tucker, et al, 2013)16 which formed the basis of the costings for many of the 
targets. The costings assumed that all degraded ecosystems would require annual 
maintenance from 2022, to prevent further degradation, and that restoration and re-creation 
action would be phased over the period 2022-2050 in line with the targets for 2030, 2040 
and 2050.  
All costs were expressed in EURO at 2020 prices. Opportunity costs relating to land 
management practices are included where the per hectare costs include payments for 
income forgone (e.g. reduced agricultural yields from meeting ecosystem restoration 
objectives).  However, the opportunity costs of potential development/land use change are 
not included. Administrative costs are estimated separately under the enabling measures.  
The benefits assessment valued the benefits of ecosystem restoration by estimating the 
cumulative area of each ecosystem restored/ re-created and applying a best estimate of the 
                                                          
16 Tucker, Graham; Underwood, Evelyn; Farmer, Andrew; Scalera, Riccardo; Dickie, Ian; McConville, 
Andrew; van Vliet, Wilbert. (2013) Estimation of the financing needs to implement Target 2 of the EU 
Biodiversity Strategy. Report to the European Commission. Institute for European Environmental Policy, 
London. 
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/nature/biodiversity/comm2006/pdf/2020/Fin%20Target%202.pdf

=== Page 45 (selectable text) ===
163 
value of benefits per hectare. The unit benefits estimates were derived from a wide-ranging 
evidence review of the benefits of ecosystem restoration for each ecosystem type. This 
selected representative estimates of the value of ecosystem service benefits resulting from 
ecosystem restoration. For most ecosystems it was possible to identify two unit values, one 
for the value of carbon storage/sequestration benefits and one for increases in total 
ecosystem service values. In each case the analysis used the median value per hectare from 
the range of estimates available, converted where necessary to EURO and updated to 2020 
prices.   
Some caution is needed in interpreting these benefits estimates, particularly for those 
ecosystems (such as coastal wetlands) where values vary widely by location, and the range 
of available benefits estimates is large.  The use of median values gives more conservative 
estimates than mean values. In general, estimates of carbon benefits are less variable and 
more certain than those of wider ecosystem service values, because they vary less by 
geography. For example, the flood management benefits of restoring a wetland vary widely 
according to its location relative to people and property, while the carbon benefits are more 
even. For most ecosystems, there are large differences between carbon values and total 
ecosystem service values, because of the high values of other ecosystem services (e.g. 
flood management, water purification, recreation and other cultural services) as well as the 
value of biodiversity itself. In many studies these are combined in overall estimates of the 
public’s willingness to pay for ecosystem restoration and related services. This is 
especially true of coastal wetlands and freshwaters. Benefit values for carbon alone, where 
available, provide a conservative estimate of the benefits of ecosystem restoration.    
The comparison of benefits and costs estimated the time profile of annual costs and benefits 
over the period 2022-2070, recognising that restoration and re-creation would take place 
up to 2050 but that benefits would continue to accrue after 2050. Maintenance costs were 
estimated for the whole 2022-2070 period. The present value of costs and benefits was 
calculated by discounting annual values using a social discount rate of 4%. The net present 
value of benefits (sum of discounted benefits – sum of discounted costs) and benefit/cost 
ratio (sum of discounted benefits/sum of discounted costs) was calculated in each case. 
Ecosystem services and -benefits 
Based on an extensive review of literature of the value of benefits of restoration (see 
summary table below), benefits estimates for each broad ecosystem type were made which 
identified changes in the values (per hectare) of ecosystem services for restored versus 
degraded ecosystems. Median values per hectare were taken from per hectare estimates 
given in different relevant literature sources for carbon storage and sequestration and total 
ecosystem service values (so including carbon benefits). This provided per hectare benefits 
estimates for each ecosystem type. 
A broad scope was taken to the estimation of total benefits, while avoiding overlaps, to 
obtain as full a picture of total benefits as possible. The types of benefits accounted for are 
similar between ecosystems, with some differences mostly caused by differences in 
services provided between different ecosystems and the scope of available studies on

=== Page 46 (selectable text) ===
164 
which median estimates were based. However due to the significant number of studies 
consulted, differences between studies will have levelled out in the final estimates. The 
table below provides an overview of benefits identified beyond biodiversity and carbon 
benefits which were assessed for all ecosystem types, as well as the number of studies 
consulted to obtain a per hectare benefits estimate.  
The benefits estimates per hectare were then applied to the area of ecosystem restored to 
give annual estimates of total benefits. Annual costs and benefits were estimated over the 
period 2022 -2070, recognising that, while restoration takes place to 2050, further 
maintenance costs continue beyond that date, while restored ecosystems continue to 
provide benefits into the future. Annual cost and benefit estimates were discounted, 
applying a 4% social discount rate, and summed to calculate their total present value.  This 
enabled total net present value (benefits – costs) and benefit: cost ratios to be calculated. 
Types of key benefits identified and number of studies used to estimate per hectare benefits 
Note: The list of benefits is non-exhaustive and excludes biodiversity conservation and 
carbon sequestration & storage benefits which were identified and assessed for each 
ecosystem type. 
Ecosystem 
type/target 
Types of benefits identified  
Number of studies used to estimate 
per ha benefits 
Inland wetlands  
Flood alleviation; water quality 
improvements; recreation- and other 
cultural services. 
22 
Coastal and other 
saline wetlands 
Storm surge mitigation; protection 
against coastal erosion; water filtration; 
fish stock restoration; recreation and 
other cultural services. 
13 
Forests 
Timber products and non-timber forest 
products, water- and soil quality, flood 
prevention, increased resilience against 
natural disturbances (droughts, fires, 
pests, and diseases); recreation- and 
other cultural services. 
Meta-analysis by De Groot et al (2013), 
which was based on 58 source studies 
Agro-ecosystems 
Food and fibre; water quality; flood 
management; pollination; soil quality; 
erosion control; climate regulation; 
cultural services (recreation, landscape, 
aesthetic values). 
>50  
Steppe, heath 
and scrubland 
Erosion control; water quality; flood 
management; fire prevention; food and 
fibre; cultural services (recreation, 
landscape and existence values). 
15 
Rivers, lakes and 
alluvial habitats 
Fresh water; fisheries; genetic resources; 
waste treatment; water quality; flood 
management; soil quality; cultural 
services (landscape, aesthetic, 
inspirational and recreational).   
>30  
Total ecosystem service benefits of river 
and lake restoration from de Groot et al 
(2020). Bankside ecosystems based on 
analyses for grassland and forest 
ecosystems.  
Marine 
ecosystems 
Flood mitigation, erosion control, water 
quality, food and fibre (including 
indirectly through fish stock 
regeneration), recreational services.  
No full quantified benefits estimate 
could be made because of data gaps, but 
the assessment identified monetised 
benefits for 3 out of 8 key habitat types

=== Page 47 (selectable text) ===
165 
in focus (seagrass beds, kelp & macro-
algal forests, and shellfish beds).  
Urban 
ecosystems 
Health and wellbeing; cooling and 
insulation (e.g. against urban heat island 
effect); recreation; food- and fibre; flood 
risk reduction; water quality; air quality, 
noise reduction, property value.  
No full quantified benefits estimate 
could be made because of data gaps and 
large contextual differences. However 
the assessment identified a range of 
qualitative benefits and positive cost-
benefit ratios from EU-wide and 
regional/local studies on urban tree and 
-green spaces limiting on a narrow set 
of benefits only (e.g. urban heat island 
effect). 
Soil ecosystems 
Water quality; flood risk mitigation; 
drought risk mitigation; pest control; 
reduced input costs; soil subsistence and 
-degradation prevention (and herewith 
resilience of food- and fibre).    
No full quantified benefits estimate 
could be made because of data gaps, but 
the assessment identified and described 
qualitatively a wide range of benefits 
and various examples of positive cost-
benefit ratios.  
Pollinators 
Sustainable provision of animal-
pollinated crops and associated benefits; 
healthy ecosystems dependent on the 
diversity of wild animal-pollinated 
plants (and wide-range of regulating 
ecosystems based on them); cultural, 
aesthetic, wellbeing.  
No full quantified benefits estimate 
could be made because of data gaps, but 
the assessment identified and described 
qualitatively a range of benefits to 
stakeholders. 
 
Risks that potentially limit the benefits of ecosystem restoration  
There are a range of risks that the estimated benefits will not be realized. These risks are 
listed in the table below. 
Type of risk 
Consequence 
Mitigation 
Implementation risk – targets are 
not implemented as specified 
Failure to implement the targets 
will mean that full benefits of 
restoration will not be realised.  
Costs will also be reduced, so 
benefit cost ratios should still be 
favourable. 
Accompanying measures – 
communications, guidance, 
incentives – will be required 
to support implementation. 
Legal enforcement measures 
can be applied if necessary.  
The B:C analysis assumes 
that only 90% of ecosystems 
will in practice be restored 
by 2050. 
Technical risk – restoration actions 
fail to achieve target condition, 
because of scientific uncertainties; 
failure to undertake appropriate 
actions;  adverse effects of climate, 
pollution, invasive species etc. 
Failure to restore ecosystem to 
good condition will mean that 
anticipated benefits for 
biodiversity and ecosystems are 
not realised.  Costs will still be 
incurred, and may exceed 
benefits.  
Knowledge sharing, 
provision of advice, 
guidance and technical 
support, monitoring and 
adaptive actions can help to 
reduce risk 
Ecosystem service risk – even if 
ecosystems are restored to good 
condition, they may not deliver 
anticipated benefits to people – e.g. 
because benefits occur in places 
remote from people and property 
Locational factors may mean that 
the value of benefits may be less 
than anticipated – e.g. few 
recreational visitors are attracted, 
water is purified in places where it 
is not consumed, flooding is 
reduced in areas of low 
population; biodiversity and 
Locational variations in 
benefits need to be 
understood.  Benefits 
assessment has applied 
median values, which is 
more conservative than 
applying mean or maximum 
values.

=== Page 48 (selectable text) ===
166 
global climate benefits may still 
be realised. 
Temporal risks – risk that delays in 
achieving good ecosystem 
condition and associated 
enhancements in ecosystem 
services will reduce the overall 
value of benefits delivered.  
Costs are normally incurred 
before benefits are realised.  Time 
preference means that delays in 
securing benefits will reduce the 
present value of benefits, and may 
cause them to be outweighed by 
costs. 
Linked to mitigation of 
technical risks, as above. 
Prioritising restoration of 
ecosystems that take longest 
to recover (e.g. woodland 
and species rich grasslands) 
increases the probability of 
benefits being delivered 
within a specified timescale. 
Financial risks – even if benefits 
are fully realised, additional costs 
of restoration may impact B:C 
ratios 
Higher than anticipated costs 
could mean benefits exceed costs 
in some locations 
Linked to mitigation of 
technical risks, as above.  
Understanding variations in 
costs and benefits, and 
reflecting this in restoration 
plans, is important. 
 
Overall, these risks are significant, particularly because of the range of scientific 
uncertainties, locational variations and environmental factors that influence the 
effectiveness of ecosystem restoration and its benefits and costs.  However, they can be 
mitigated through application and sharing of best available evidence; a robust approach to 
restoration planning; guidance, technical support and skills development; and monitoring 
and adaptive management.  The high benefit:cost ratios estimated for each ecosystem 
type, with benefit:cost ratios ranging from 4:1 to 38:1, leave a sufficient margin to 
ensure that ecosystem restoration will be efficient even if benefits are less than 
anticipated.  
Although in theory the EU should aim to restore all degraded ecosystems by 2050, and 
targets should align with this goal, in practice complete implementation is unlikely to 
be achievable.  Some sites may be inaccessible, face insurmountable technical barriers to 
restoration, be adversely affected by external pressures such as pollution, be earmarked for 
changes in land use, or be subject to disputes between land owners, managers and the 
authorities. If full implementation is not achieved, there will be a reduction in costs as well 
as benefits, such that benefit:cost ratios will still be favourable.  The analysis for the impact 
assessment assumed that restoring 90% of degraded ecosystems could be regarded as 
a realistic level of full implementation. The benefit: cost analyses are therefore based on 
a 90% restoration target by 2050. 
A failure to restore 90% of the area of degraded ecosystems by 2050 would reduce both 
the benefits and costs of ecosystem restoration.  The table below estimates the present 
value of the benefits and costs of restoration of different ecosystem types, based on 
achievement of 90% restoration by 2050, and if lower (70% or 80%) rates of restoration 
are achieved. 
Benefits and costs of achieving different levels of restoration by 2050, Scenario A 
(Present Value, EUR million)

=== Page 49 (selectable text) ===
167 
90% restoration by 
2050 
80% restoration by 
2050 
70% restoration by 
2050 
Restoration of 
ecosystem type 
Benef
its 
Cost
s 
Net 
Benefit
s 
Benef
its 
Cost
s 
Net 
Benefit
s 
Benef
its 
Cost
s 
Net 
Benefit
s 
Peatlands 
38 70
2 
4 77
9 
33 923 
34 40
2 
4 24
8 
30 154 
30 10
2 
3 71
7 
26 385 
Marshlands 
6 388 
3 64
3 
2 745 
5 678 
3 23
8 
2 440 
4 968 
2 83
3 
2 135 
Coastal wetlands 
181 6
14 
5 14
1 
176 473 
161 4
35 
4 57
0 
156 865 
141 2
55 
3 99
9 
137 257 
Forests 
203 5
64 
50 0
82 
153 482 
180 9
46 
44 5
18 
136 428 
158 3
28 
38 9
53 
119 375 
Agro-ecosystems 
229 5
89 
26 5
59 
203 030 
204 0
79 
23 6
08 
180 471 
178 5
69 
20 6
57 
157 912 
Steppe,  heath and 
scrub 
32 65
8  
9 19
8  
23 460  
29 02
9  
8 17
6  
20 853  
25 40
1  
7 15
4  
18 247  
Rivers,  lakes and 
alluvial habitats 
862 3
49 
35 2
32 
827 117 
766 5
32 
31 3
17 
735 215 
670 7
16 
27 4
03 
643 313 
Subtotal 
1 554 
864  
134 
634  
1 420 2
30  
1 382 
101  
119 
675  
1 262 4
26  
1 209 
339  
104 
716  
1 104 6
23  
 
The present value of the quantified net benefits is estimated to total €1,418 billion if 90% 
of these ecosystems are restored by 2050, but would fall to €1,260 billion if only 80% of 
ecosystem area were restored, or €1,102 billion if only 70% ecosystem restoration were 
achieved.  
The costs of ecosystem restoration are incurred immediately, while the benefits for 
biodiversity and ecosystem services are realised only when restored ecosystems reach good 
condition. Evidence indicates that the time profile of benefits is non-linear and varies 
between ecosystems, with some habitats being easier and quicker to restore than others.  
For example a review by Maskell et al (2014)17 found that some freshwater wetlands can 
be effectively restored within five years, but may take longer to regain their full 
biodiversity.  Other habitats such as calcareous grasslands and some woodlands may take 
more than 100 years to be restored to their full biodiversity value. Within each habitat, 
some aspects of ecosystem functioning and services are likely to return before others.  For 
example, restoration of blanket bog may achieve improvements in hydrology, carbon 
storage and even recolonization of vegetation within three years, but may take 20-50 years 
to restore full vegetation communities.  It follows that some ecosystem services may be 
enhanced immediately while others will take longer to recover.  The benefits analysis for 
this impact assessment estimates the present value of future flows of benefits; however, 
this is inevitably subject to a range of uncertainties.  
Impacts on areas surrounded by ecosystems in which restoration measures are taken 
                                                          
17 Maskell L, Jarvis S, Jones L, Garbutt A and Dickie I (2014) Restoration of natural capital: review of 
evidence. Report to the Natural Capital Committee, UK. 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/517024
/ncc-research-restoration-natural-capital-review.pdf

=== Page 50 (selectable text) ===
168 
 The assessment did not quantify indirect costs of restoration measures that could be 
occurred in areas outside of ecosystem areas in which measures would be taken. The reason 
for this was that such ‘external’ negative impacts of measures identified would likely be 
relatively limited. 
One possibly more significant indirect impact identified was that of rewetting of inland 
wetlands on neighbouring areas under intensive arable- or grazing agriculture. These 
impacts would be similar as those assessed for inland Annex I habitats, and would require 
different management practices by private landowners and land managers, in return for 
incentive payments which include compensation for opportunity costs relating directly to 
land management (e.g. income forgone through reduced yield or grazing). As explained in 
Annex III, such practices and incentive schemes are in place, as well as public budgets to 
support their increased uptake.  
The rewetting of inland wetlands could locally present significant indirect opportunity 
costs for agriculture in some areas, especially in small wetland sites surrounded by 
intensive agriculture where mitigation measures to avoid seepage are not in place. 
However their inclusion in the cost-benefit analysis would unlikely have made a significant 
difference on the overall cost estimate. This is because they represent only a small share 
of the total area of inland wetland ecosystem considered in the assessment.  
Considering the very positive benefit to cost ratios of nature restoration across the different 
ecosystem types, even if external costs excluded would nonetheless significant, they would 
likely still be (far) outweighed by larger benefits and would not have changed the overall 
findings of the assessment. Inland wetland rewetting for example could also have positive 
impacts on water availability for agriculture during droughts likely to increase with climate 
change in most regions. 
 
Opportunity costs: Opportunity costs of implementing the nature restoration targets were 
considered for all thematic assessments and included in calculations to some extent. Any 
effort to restore nature comes with an opportunity cost to certain alternative development 
pathways, particularly at local level. However, because of the many potential alternatives 
it is impossible to provide a full and systematic assessment, taking account of overall 
effects, especially as one would also need to consider the opportunity cost of not restoring 
ecosystems. Instead, the assessments focussed only on the most significant costs of 
restoration measures in the field that would be required by economic operators such as 
farmers, foresters and fishermen.  
Ecosystem restoration that requires voluntary action will not be achieved unless adequate 
compensation for opportunity costs is provided since economic operators will not restore 
ecosystems if the payments to do so do not compensate them for opportunity costs of 
reduced production. Where the costs of ecosystem restoration are met through incentive 
payments to land managers, the latter are compensated for opportunity costs (payment for 
income forgone). Under EU agricultural policy, these incentives are already in place in the

=== Page 51 (selectable text) ===
169 
form of agri-environment-climate schemes and -investments, which could be made more 
attractive to farmers with supplementary eco-schemes. Therefore, the additional 
opportunity costs of new nature restoration targets will largely be accounted for if available 
budgets and tools are used effectively. Opportunity costs of land use change due to re-
creation were not included in the cost calculations, since a large share of habitat can be re-
created on land that already has a nature function and this would mainly require a higher 
restoration effort compared to habitat that still meets Annex I standards. Where land would 
change owner and/or function, this is nearly in all cases the result of voluntary selling or 
abandoning of land and was therefore not regarded as an opportunity cost to operations. 
The cost estimates in the thematic ecosystem assessments therefore include direct 
opportunity costs resulting from changes in land management practices, and reflected in 
incentive payments to land managers. Examples include income forgone from reduced 
grazing intensity on heathland, wetland and grassland ecosystems; creation of new habitats 
such as wetlands, heathlands, forests and  grasslands through conversion of cropland and 
pasture land; reduced timber harvest from forests; and restrictions on fishing activity in 
coastal wetlands.  In each case these are incorporated in per hectare unit costs of ecosystem 
restoration, re-creation and maintenance. 
Only in a few thematic impact assessments uncompensated opportunity costs were 
identified in cases where nature restoration would be mandated through bans rather than 
incentives. These mainly include rules limiting fishing effort and rules preventing soil 
sealing in cities. Estimating these costs is difficult since rules lead to adaptive management 
and often deliver more efficient solutions in the longer term. For example, evidence shows 
how partial restrictions in fishing efforts in marine protected areas have triggered more 
efficient fisheries management and enhanced longer-term yields and overall ecosystem 
health around these areas. Under the EMFAF, the structural fund; that supports the 
implementation of the CFP, resources are available to compensate for short-term losses 
due to reduced catches and support investments in e.g. adaptive and more selective fishing 
gears and techniques or scientifc research. For the restoration of estuaries and mud- & 
sandflats, nonetheless specific costs were included to phase out the most harmful 
(shell)fishing practices from Annex I habitats, based on experiences in the Wadden Sea.   
Uncompensated opportunity costs were also identified in the urban thematic assessment 
and for target options to prevent soil sealing and increase urban tree cover. Implementing 
these targets would require very different choices in land use in urban areas, with 
potentially very high costs (and benefits) depending on the location and alternative land 
use. These costs and benefits can be expected to vary very widely across urban areas in the 
EU, given the wide variations in the scale, density, format and design of urban areas 
between countries and regions, as well as differences in land prices and development 
patterns.  Assessing the overall costs and benefits of land use change across the entire urban 
environment is too complex and impossible with the current evidence base, and therefore 
not quantified in the assessment.  
Qualitative assessment: For the thematic assessments for marine-, urban- and soil 
ecosystems and pollinators, full monetary assessments could be not developed at the same

=== Page 52 (selectable text) ===
170 
level as for assessments underpinned by detailed data on the extent and condition of Annex 
I habitats. Nonetheless the assessments could make informed qualitative assessments based 
on extensive meta- and case study evidence describing costs and benefits both on 
biodiversity as well as range of ecosystem services including climate action. Some of this 
evidence included quantified cost-benefit data too. For example, in the marine environment 
the relatively limited number of available studies on restoration cost-benefit-analysis 
suggested that restoring marine habitats record an average benefit-cost ratio of 10, 
comparable to ratios found in the more detailed assessments for terrestrial habitats. 
Similarly, while little quantified evidence was available to assess the additional benefits of 
restoration action for soils and pollinator populations, even conservative estimates of total 
benefits are so high that even a relatively limited improvement in condition would compare 
favourably against the estimated cost of restoration measures to implement the target 
options. In the urban environment, available monetised evidence of benefits of restoration 
e.g. by tree cover reducing heat island effects is arguably the most extensive and 
overwhelming, even though biodiversity and climate mitigation benefits would be more 
limited. In summary, the absence of aggregated monetary cost and benefit calculations for 
four of the thematic assessments has a methodological reason and should not be 
misinterpreted as meaning that target options assessed in them would therefore stand out 
less positively in terms of their net benefit to EU policy objectives.

=== Page 53 (selectable text) ===
171 
 
Annex V: Specific targets considered for the main ecosystem 
types 
For targets in step 1 marked with (*) it is likely that finalising the measurement 
methodology and establishing a baseline would be ready by 2023. Given that negotiations 
with Parliament and Council on the proposal would last until at least mid-2023, these could 
be in principle included in the legislative proposal.  
Targets in step 2 are indicative. Further targets, not listed here may also be considered for 
step 2. 
POTENTIAL TARGETS AND OBLIGATIONS  
STEP 1 
STEP 2 
WETLANDS (incl. Peatlands, marshlands & coastal wetlands) 
 
Restore all HD Annex I wetland habitat area to good condition, 
with all necessary restoration measures completed on 30 % (or 
15 %) of degraded areas by 2030, 60 % (or 40 %) by 2040 and 
100 % by 205018.  
 
Recreate 30 % (or 15 %) of additional habitat area required to 
achieve favorable conservation status of HD Annex I wetland 
habitats by 2030, 60 % (or 40 %) by 2040 and 100 % by 2050. 
 
Restore and re-create the area as necessary to enhance the 
conservation status of species listed in Annex II, IV and V of the 
Habitats Directive as well as wild birds associated with wetlands 
in view of achieving their favourable conservation status by 2050, 
with at least 30 % achieved by 2030 and at least 60 % by 204019. 
 
 
Target option discarded as a result of the Impact Assessment (explanation in annex VI): 
 General habitat restoration and re-creation of marshlands 
 Recreate salt marshes (excluded as specific targets as largely covered under HD Annex I target). 
 Phasing out bottom-disturbing (shell-)fishing in Natura 2000 sites. 
FORESTS  
 
Restore all HD Annex I forest habitat area to good condition, with 
all necessary restoration measures completed on 30 % (or 15 %) 
of degraded areas by 2030, 60 % (or 40 %) by 2040 and 100 % by 
2050.  
 
Recreate 30 % (or 15 %) of additional habitat area required to 
achieve favorable conservation status of HD Annex I forest 
habitats by 2030, 60 % (or 40 %) by 2040 and 100 % by 2050. 
 
Restore and re-create the area as necessary to enhance the 
conservation status of species listed in Annex II, IV and V of the 
Habitats Directive as well as wild birds associated with forests in 
view of achieving their favourable conservation status by 2050, 
with at least 30 % achieved by 2030 and at least 60 % by 2040. 
 
Achieve a continuously improving trend of each of the following 
indicators, until satisfactory levels are achieved or until new 
Restore 
degraded 
non-HD 
Annex I forest habitat areas. 
                                                          
18 The percentages between brackets represent an alternative (slower) rate of restoration. See explanation in 
section 6.3. 
19 As peatland species are well covered as regards their habitat, this target focuses particularly on species of 
marshlands and coastal wetlands.

=== Page 54 (selectable text) ===
172 
POTENTIAL TARGETS AND OBLIGATIONS  
STEP 1 
STEP 2 
targets are in place: deadwood, age structure, forest connectivity, 
tree cover density, abundance of common forest birds, soil organic 
carbon in forest land. 
 
AGRO-ECOSYSTEMS AND GRASSLANDS 
 
Restore all HD Annex I agricultural habitat area to good 
condition, with all necessary restoration measures completed on 
30 % (or 15 %) of degraded areas by 2030, 60 % (or 40 %) by 
2040 and 100 % by 2050.  
 
Recreate 30 % (or 15 %) of additional habitat area required to 
achieve favorable conservation status of HD Annex I agricultural 
habitats by 2030, 60 % (or 40 %) by 2040 and 100 % by 2050. 
 
To increase the populations of farmland birds as measured by the 
common farmland bird index re-set at 100 at year X [one year after 
the entry into force of this Regulation] to: 
o 
110 by 2030, 120 by 2040 and 130 by 2050, for Member 
States with historically depleted populations of farmland 
birds; 
o 
105 by 2030, 110 by 2040 and 115 by 2050, for Member 
States that do not have historically depleted populations of 
farmland birds. 
 
Restore and re-create the area as necessary to enhance the 
conservation status of species listed in Annex II, IV and V of the 
Habitats Directive as well as wild birds associated with agro-
habitats and grassland in view of achieving their favourable 
conservation status by 2050, with at least 15 %/30 % of all 
necessary actions carried out by 2030 and 40 %/60 % by 2040 and 
100 % 2050. 
 
For drained peatlands under agricultural use, to put in place 
restoration measures, including rewetting, on at least: 
o 
30% of such areas by 2030 of which at least a quarter is 
rewetted; 
o 
50% of such areas by 2040 of which at least half is rewetted, 
and 
o 
70% of such areas by 2050 of which at least half is rewetted.  
 
Achieve a continuously improving trend of each of the following 
indicators: 
o 
grassland butterfly index;  
o 
organic carbon content in cropland mineral soils;  
until satisfactory levels are achieved or until the new targets 
are in place; and 
o 
share of agricultural land with high-diversity landscape 
features until 2030, with the view to achieving the EU 
commitment to bring back at least 10% of agricultural area 
under high-diversity landscape features  by 2030;  
o 
percentage of species and habitats of Union interest related 
to agriculture with stable or increasing trends until 100% is 
reached at the latest by 2050. 
 
Restore and recreate semi-
modified and semi-natural 
grasslands. 
 
Restore 
and 
recreate 
unploughed 
/ 
untilled 
grasslands. 
Target option discarded as a result of the Impact Assessment (explanation in annex VI): 
 Increasing landscape features in the farming landscape to a minimum coverage of 10 %. 
STEPPE, HEATHLANDS & SCRUB, DUNES AND ROCKY HABITATS 
 
Restore all HD Annex I steppe, heath and scrub, dunes and rocky 
habitat area to good condition, with all necessary restoration 
measures completed on 30 % (or 15 %) of degraded areas by 
2030, 60 % (or 40 %) by 2040 and 100 % by 2050.  
 
Recreate 30 % (or 15 %) of additional habitat area required to 
achieve favorable conservation status of HD Annex I steppe, heath

=== Page 55 (selectable text) ===
173 
POTENTIAL TARGETS AND OBLIGATIONS  
STEP 1 
STEP 2 
and scrub, dunes and rocky habitats by 2030, 60 % (or 40 %) by 
2040 and 100 % by 2050. 
 
Restore and re-create the area as necessary to enhance the 
conservation status of species listed in Annex II, IV and V of the 
Habitats Directive as well as wild birds and associated with 
steppe, heath and scrub, dunes and rocky habitats in view of 
achieving their favourable conservation status by 2050, with at 
least 30 % (or 15 %) of all necessary actions carried out by 2030 
and 60 % (or 40 %) by 2040 and 100 % by 2050. 
FRESHWATER: RIVERS, LAKES AND ALLUVIAL HABITATS 
 
Restore all HD Annex I rivers, lakes and alluvial habitat area to 
good condition, with all necessary restoration measures 
completed on 30 % (or 15 %) of degraded areas by 2030, 60 % (or 
40 %) by 2040 and 100 % by 2050.  
 
Recreate 30 % (or 15 %) of additional habitat area required to 
achieve favourable conservation status of HD Annex I rivers, 
lakes and alluvial habitats by 2030, 60 % (or 40 %) by 2040 and 
100 % by 2050. 
 
Restore and re-create the area as necessary to enhance the 
conservation status of species listed in Annex II, IV and V of the 
Habitats Directive as well as wild birds associated with rivers, 
lakes and alluvial habitats in view of achieving their favourable 
conservation status by 2050, with at least 15 % achieved by 2030 
and at least 40 % by 2040. 
 
Develop an inventory of barriers to longitudinal and lateral 
connectivity of rivers and a detailed plan of which barriers will be 
removed, with a view to achieving free-flowing status where 
possible and necessary to restore the habitats depending on such 
connectivity.  
 
Mapping out of small water units, with a view to identify their 
restoration and recreation potential and assess their contribution 
to improve connectivity between habitats as part of high diversity 
landscape features, contributing to the restoration of habitats and 
species. 
 
Numerical target on the 
restoration of free flowing 
rivers.20  
 
Restoration of small water 
units. 
Target option discarded as a result of the Impact Assessment (explanation in annex VI): 
 Implement standardised ecological flow assessments. 
MARINE ECOSYSTEMS 
  
 
To put in place the necessary restoration measures to improve 
all areas that are not in good condition to good condition in 
specified marine habitat types, with measures put in place on at 
least 30 % of such areas by 2030, on at least 60 % of such areas 
by 2040, and on at least 90 % of such areas by 205021:  
a. 
HD Annex I marine habitats (sub-types of Annex I habitat 
types, such as seagrass beds, macro-algal forests, sponge, 
coral and coralligenous beds, maerl beds, shellfish beds, 
vents and seeps); 
 
Target on specific marine 
animal species. 
                                                          
20 This is related to the target in step 1 which requires Member States to develop inventories of barriers to 
longitudinal and lateral connectivity of rivers and a detailed plan of which barriers will be removed, with 
a view to achieving free-flowing status where possible and necessary to restore the habitats depending on 
such connectivity. This will contribute to achieving the voluntary target of the BDS2030 of 25 000 km of 
free flowing rivers. As part of step 2, a more exact approach to setting a  numerical target on free-flowing 
rivers, including lateral and longitudinal aspects, would be developed. 
21 It is important to bear in mind the long time periods to restore certain marine ecosystems, thus this 
proposed target is based on putting necessary measures into place by 2030 and with the aim of arriving at 
good condition beyond 2030.

=== Page 56 (selectable text) ===
174 
POTENTIAL TARGETS AND OBLIGATIONS  
STEP 1 
STEP 2 
b. Marine habitats outside HD Annex I (such as marine shelf 
sediments). 
 
To put in place the restoration measures necessary to re-
establish those habitat types on at least 30 % of the additional 
area needed to reach the favourable reference area of each 
group of habitat types by 2030, at least 60 % of such areas by 
2040, and 100 % of such areas by 2050; 
 
To put in place restoration measures for the habitats of marine 
species listed in Annexes II, IV and V of the HD and Annex I 
to Regulation 2019/1241 and of wild birds covered under Birds 
Directive, that are needed to improve the quality of those 
habitats, re-establish those habitats and create sufficient 
connectivity among those habitats corresponding to the 
ecological requirements of those species. 
Targets discarded as a result of the Impact Assessment (explanation in Annex VI): 
 
To restore habitats in order to maximise the delivery of key ecosystem services. 
 
Restore and re-create the area as necessary to enhance the conservation status of species listed in 
Annex II, IV and V of the Habitats Directive as well as wild birds associated with marine 
ecosystems in view of achieving their favourable conservation status by 2050, with at least x % 
achieved by 2030 and at least y % by 2040. 
URBAN ECOSYSTEMS 
 
To ensure that there is no net loss of urban green space, and 
urban tree canopy cover by 2030, compared to 2021, within all 
cities and towns and suburbs; 
 
To ensure that there is an increase in the total national area of 
urban green space in cities and towns and suburbs of at least 3 
% of the total area of cities and towns and suburbs in 2021, by 
2040, and at least 5 % by 2050. In addition Member States shall 
ensure:  
i. 
a minimum of 10 % urban tree canopy cover in  all  
cities and towns and suburbs by 2050; and  
ii. 
a net gain of urban green space that is integrated into 
existing and new buildings and infrastructure 
developments, including through renovations and 
renewals, in all  cities   and towns and suburbs. 
Targets discarded as a result of the Impact Assessment (explanation in Annex VI): 
 No net soil sealing in Functional Urban Areas by 2030. 
POLLINATORS 
 Reverse the decline of pollinators (*): This target relates in 
particular to the following ecosystems: agro-habitats and 
grasslands, wetlands, forests and heathlands & scrub. 
 
Targets discarded as a result of the Impact Assessment (explanation in Annex VI): 
 To achieve good condition of pollinator species protected by the EU Habitats Directive.  
 To achieve good condition of pollinator habitats protected by the EU Habitats Directive. 
 
An EU wide methodology for assessing the condition of ecosystems would be established.

=== Page 57 (selectable text) ===
175 
Annex VI: Analysis by ecosystem 
This (large) annex is provided as a separate file. It provides input to Chapter 6 on policy 
option 3.

=== Page 58 (selectable text) ===
176 
Annex VII: Description, trends and impacts of the main options 
This annex mainly serves as input for Chapter 6 on policy options 1 (baseline) and 2 
(overarching goal). 
1 
BASELINE 
This chapter describes, based on monitoring evidence on the state of ecosystems, previous 
experience in restoration governance and expert judgement, the likely evolution of ecosystems' 
condition and nature restoration developments in the EU towards 2030 (and to some extent 
2040 and 2050) in the absence of legally binding EU nature restoration targets. To forecast 
the likely evolution and impacts of this baseline scenario is necessary so that these can be 
compared against the impacts of the different additional policy options (including targets) 
considered in Chapter 5.  
The EU had set itself a voluntary nature restoration target between 2011 and 2020 and is 
implementing several pieces of environmental legislation that contribute to nature restoration 
as part of meeting specific ecological objectives; in particular these include the implementation 
of the EU Birds and Habitats Directives, the Water Framework Directive (WFD) and the 
Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) and existing climate laws. In addition, some 
EU Member States have additional national policies and strategies requiring nature restoration. 
Lastly, the EU Green Deal and initiatives such as the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2030 include 
a series of new commitments that would also contribute to nature restoration, in a direct or in 
an indirect manner. Reporting data and recent evaluations of the state of implementation of 
these activities to date provide a key source for this baseline assessment. It is important to 
underline that in the baseline scenario, “implementation” of relevant policies, voluntary 
commitments 
and 
legislation 
is 
interpreted 
as 
“realistic”, 
i.e. 
as 
based 
on 
expected implementation by Member States and based on experience to date. This therefore 
does not interpret this as the full and complete implementation of these policies. This chapter 
then describes the likely predicted evolution of the baseline scenario for the next decade(s) 
considering realistic estimates of policy implementation, as well as the likely evolution of 
biophysical developments, such as for example, based on the predicted effects of climate 
change.  
1.1 EU nature restoration under Business as Usual  
1.1.1 Implementation EU Nature Directives, WFD and MSFD  
Nature restoration in the EU stems from both voluntary and mandatory commitments, but is 
mostly driven by EU and national legislation that sets concrete ecological objectives. At EU 
level, four Directives set such objectives: The EU Birds- and Habitats Directives, the Water 
Framework Directive (WFD) and the Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD). As 
mentioned in Chapter 3, progress in implementing these four key EU laws in the future 
contributes to determining the level of additional action required on nature restoration in the 
EU.

=== Page 59 (selectable text) ===
177 
There is good ground to argue that in the period towards 2030 the Nature Directives will see 
enhanced implementation compared to 2010-2020: firstly, the designation of the Natura 2000 
network is nearing completion on land, which could free up resources in national and regional 
administrations towards the management of the sites. Secondly, as mentioned in section 3.1.1, 
the Nature Directives include specific requirements that Member States should take the 
necessary conservation measures to ultimately achieve and maintain Favourable Conservation 
Status of protected habitats and species, which in many cases will include ecological restoration 
especially in Natura 2000 sites. In recent years significant efforts on developing site-specific 
objectives- and measures including restoration measures have been made, which is an 
important prerequisite for the effectiveness of their implementation22. The better articulation 
of needs in management planning has also supported investment planning, and EU Member 
States in their Prioritised Action Frameworks for Natura 200023 and beyond have 
communicated much more comprehensively the full investment needs to achieve objectives. 
This in turn will support the justification for providing such funding under the CAP or Regional 
Development. However, experience has shown the challenges of providing funding, even in 
EU Member States in which such needs were clearly articulated24.  
However, as the Nature Directives lack legal deadlines for the achievement of their objectives, 
an important defining factor in the pace of implementation will be the political ambition to 
achieve sooner rather than later the Directives’ objective to reach Favourable Conservation 
Status and, obviously, the funding available for the necessary action, including in relation to 
the necessary investments for strengthening knowledge and administrative capacity.  
With the absence of legal deadlines, there would continue to be a weak driver for action to 
achieve the objectives of the Nature Directives. Furthermore, concerning the Habitats 
Directive, for Annex I habitats and habitats of Annex II species outside Natura 2000, there is 
no specific provision on restoration, albeit the achievement of the directive’s objective would 
require this to happen. The same goes for species listed in Annex IV and V of the directive, for 
which no specific restoration provisions are set, despite the objective to maintain or restore 
them, at favourable conservation status. The same goes for the Birds Directive which includes 
some provisions on restoration mainly related to bird species for which Member States are to 
classify, protect and conserve Special Protection Areas (part of the Natura 2000 network) 
(species listed in Annex I of the directive as well as regularly occurring migratory species not 
listed in Annex I). The vast amount of land and sea covered by habitat types and habitats of 
species of EU importance, including birds, makes it difficult to achieve restoration objectives 
without explicit legal requirements in areas outside protected areas.  
                                                          
22 See for example: EEA (2020) Management effectiveness in the EU's Natura 2000 network of protected areas. 
Available at: https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/management-effectiveness-in-the-eus  
23European 
Commission 
webpage 
on 
financing 
Natura 
2000: 
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/nature/natura2000/financing/index_en.htm   
24 See for example Olmeda C. et al for the European Commission (2016) Integration of Natura 2000 and 
biodiversity into EU funding. Available at:  
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/nature/natura2000/financing/docs/Natura2000_integration_into_EU %20fun
ds.pdf

=== Page 60 (selectable text) ===
178 
For the Water Framework Directive, there is some reason to believe that implementation 
may increase compared to progress between 2010 and 2020. Firstly, in 2027 the Directive’s 
final deadline for extending the achievement of good status of water bodies will be reached, 
after which it becomes legally more challenging for Member States to push implementation 
action into the future25. Secondly, the Fitness Check of EU Water Legislation has reconfirmed 
the WFD’s added value, uncovered important priorities for improved implementation action, 
and has provided more legal certainty for the years to come26. Nonetheless, early reviews of 
draft management plans for the WFD’s 3rd cycle (2021-2027) suggest that despite some 
exceptions, foreseen progress on restoration -and towards the WFD’s objectives more general- 
will remain slow due to numerous exemptions and insufficient integration and -investment27. 
While WFD implementation would bring further active passive restoration benefits, they would 
likely be largely insufficient to restore the structure and function of relevant freshwater, coastal 
and marine ecosystems required to meet the objectives of the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2030.    
For the Marine Strategy Framework Directive implementation may improve towards 2030, 
however since the Directive has only existed since 2008 it is more challenging to forecast the 
extent of future improvements. The implementation report on the first management cycle 
highlighted numerous implementation challenges, and the European Commission has 
announced a review28. Evidence suggests that unless there will be a significant increase in 
investments, there is little likelihood that implementation will see a very different trajectory 
than in recent years.    
In 2017 the European Commission commissioned a study which included a quantitative 
assessment of the amount of restoration undertaken in the then EU28 between 2010 and 2017 
(Eftec et al)29 which is currently the best indication available of baseline restoration extent 
under a situation of a voluntary EU-wide restoration target. The study provided estimates of 
average annual EU area on which restoration action had been taken based on both binding 
and voluntary commitments and for different ecosystem types. By projecting into the future, 
the annual area on which restoration action has taken place as estimated by Eftec et al, it is 
                                                          
25 European Commission (2019) COM(2019) 95 final on the implementation of the Water Framework Directive 
(2000/60/EC) and the Floods Directive (2007/60/EC). Second River Basin Management Plans and First Flood 
Risk 
Management 
Plans. 
Available 
at: 
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/water/water-
framework/impl_reports.htm   
26 European Commission (2019) SWD(2019) 439 final on the Fitness Check of the Fitness Check of the 
Water Framework Directive, Groundwater Directive, Environmental Quality Standards Directive and Floods 
Directive. 
Available 
at: 
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/water/fitness_check_of_the_eu_water_legislation/index_en.htm  
27 E.g. Schmidt  G. & Rogger M. for Living Rivers Europe (2021) The final sprint for Europe’s rivers. Available 
at: 
https://wwfeu.awsassets.panda.org/downloads/wwf_the_final_sprint_for_rivers_full_report_june_2021_1.pdf 
28 European Commission press release of 25 June 2020 ‘More protection for our seas and oceans is needed, report 
finds’. Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/environment/news/more-protection-our-seas-and-oceans-needed-
report-finds-2020-06-25_en  
29 eftec et al., (2017) Technical support in relation to the promotion of ecosystem restoration in the context of 
the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020. Available at: 
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/nature/pdf/promotion_of_ecosystem_restoration_in_the_context_of_the_EU
_biodiversity_strategy_report%20.zip

=== Page 61 (selectable text) ===
179 
possible to extrapolate the extent of ecosystems that – at the same pace and the same relative 
effort per ecosystem – would see restoration action in the future. This extrapolation shows 
that restoration measures would only reach a fraction of total ecosystem extent, or 0,71% 
by 2030, 1,50% by 2040 and 2,30% by 2050. When only considering only the binding share 
of restoration action extent found by Eftec et al, which are the ones most likely to actually 
deliver on biodiversity conservation objectives, these shares are only 0,31%, 066% and 
1,01% respectively. When comparing the binding restoration extent against the best estimate 
of degraded area of Annex I habitat, action would cover less than 2% by 2030, 4% by 2040 
and 6% by 2050. As Figure VII-1 shows, even if assuming the Eftec study had only identified 
25% of the actual restoration action undertaken and all real action would have been fully 
targeted to Annex I habitats, there would still be a significant remaining effort gap of more than 
75% by 2050. The ecosystem-specific Impact Assessments supporting this overall assessment 
provide more detailed baseline information per ecosystem (see executive summaries in Annex 
VI). 
Figure VII-1: Projected restoration effort (extent) based on Eftec et al and remaining gap to 15-40-100% HD 
Annex I targets 
Note: This figure assumes that Eftec et all only identified 25% of actual restoration action in the then EU28, and 
the total effort towards the targets reflects the best-estimate total area of degraded Annex I habitats in the EU27 
based on the last conservation status reporting under the EU Habitats Directive (Art 17 reporting)30.         
 
 
1.2. Socio-economic developments 
1.2.1. Demographic trends 
For the period to 2030 no major changes in demographic trends are foreseen compared to today. 
Population growth is slowing, but the EU population is still expected to grow to 2030 and likely 
to 2050, after which it will gradually shrink. Further ageing and depopulation will continue to 
                                                          
30 Available at: https://www.eea.europa.eu/themes/biodiversity/state-of-nature-in-the-eu/explore-nature-
reporting-data   
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
2021
2030
2040
2050
Projected effort
Gap to target

=== Page 62 (selectable text) ===
180 
impact on rural areas across the EU, while urban areas are expected to continue to see new 
population growth. Both urban and rural areas offer different opportunities and challenges for 
nature restoration depending on the regional context. The ongoing rural exodus will further 
increase pressure in many regions on the conservation of high-nature value farmland as 
traditional land management practices disappear. In other regions, land abandonment will offer 
opportunities for natural vegetation to recover with limited ‘re-wilding’ management. The 
share of population living in cities will continue to grow from approximately 75 % today to 
nearly 84 % by 205031.    
Figure VII-2: Crude rate of total population change in NUTS 3 regions, 2018 
 
Source: Eurostat  
1.2.2. Post-COVID recovery 
The impacts of the COVID crisis on the EU economy should not be underestimated and may 
depress the priority given by EU Member States to environmental policy objectives as 
happened after the European sovereign debt crisis. However, based on expert evidence 
available when writing this study3233, thanks to more decisive public policy and -fiscal 
measures, the economic outlook is slightly more optimistic than previously envisioned, and 
growth and employment are expected to recover to pre-crisis levels in 2022. However, these 
predictions come with significant uncertainties as well as differences between different EU 
Member States and regions.   
                                                          
31 UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (2018) 2018 Revision of World Urbanization Prospects. 
Available at: https://population.un.org/wup/  
32 European Commission Spring 2021 Economic Forecast: https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-
euro/economic-performance-and-forecasts/economic-forecasts/spring-2021-economic-forecast_en 
33 OECD (2021) EA and EU Economic Snapshot - Economic Forecast Summary (May 2021). Part of OECD 
Global Economic Outlook. Available at: https://www.oecd.org/economy/euro-area-and-european-union-
economic-snapshot/

=== Page 62 (OCR from images) ===

[page_62_img_1]
Canarias (ES)

ef

La Martinique
(FR)

%

‘Guyane (FR) La Réunion (FR)
Mayotte (FR) Malta

§ o || =>
z,
Acores (PT) | Madeira (PT)

+ | (per 1 000 habitants)

Legend

>-46
-46-0
0-29
29-7
>7

=== Page 63 (selectable text) ===
181 
1.3. Expected trends in ecosystem extent and condition 
1.3.1. Ecosystem extent 
Based on trends over the last decade and foreseen trends in key land use defining indicators34, 
we do not expect major changes in ecosystem extent in comparison to the current situation. We 
therefore did not make any adjustments in our baseline scenario in changes of extent.   
1.3.2. Cross-cutting pressures & threats 
As explained in section 2.2, because of the diversity in ecosystem types in the EU and 
differences in what constitutes their good condition, an ecosystem-specific approach was taken 
to assessing impacts for this study. This included in depth evaluation of key pressures and 
threats preventing recovery today and into the future as well as their drivers, which are at the 
root of ongoing ecosystem degradation and risk undermining future restoration efforts. The 
outcomes of these detailed analyses can be found in the ecosystem-specific technical 
supplements. Brief summaries of these analyses are included in Annex VI. An important source 
of EU-wide information on pressures on ecosystems is the reporting under the EU Habitats and 
Birds Directives. Under the latest reporting round, Member States reported over 67 000 
individual pressures in over 200 different pressure categories. The results show that agriculture 
remains the most common pressure and threat on species and habitats, followed by 
urbanisation, forestry and the modification of water regimes.    
The impacts of climate change on ecosystems are rising, are increasingly understood and 
reported. The EU Ecosystem Assessment35 succinctly describes the known estimated potential 
impacts, which are mainly driven through changing temperature and precipitation patterns. In 
most parts of Europe, drought frequency will increase (Figure VII-3), heavy precipitation 
events will increase in winter across Europe and in northern Europe in summers too (Figure 
VII-4). Longer fire seasons and periods of precipitation shortages will significantly increase 
the risk of forest fires, also in regions where it has not been a nature feature of local forest 
ecosystems (Figure VII-5). While these changes in trends are increasing at a relatively slow 
pace compared to some other more direct anthropogenic pressures, recent evidence shows they 
are accelerating and will be an important factor in restoration  success towards 2030 and 
certainly 2040 and 2050.  
                                                          
34 For example, in relation to food and farming, see: European Commission (2021) EU agricultural outlook for 
markets, income and environment. Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/food-farming-
fisheries/farming/documents/agricultural-outlook-2020-report_en.pdf  
35 Section 4.1 of the chapter on cross-cutting ecosystem assessments deals specifically with climate change. 
Maes, J et al (2020) Mapping and Assessment of Ecosystems and their Services: An EU ecosystem 
assessment. Available at: https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC120383

=== Page 64 (selectable text) ===
182 
Figure VII-3: Projected change in meteorological drought frequency between the present (1981-2010) and 
the mid-century 21st century (2041-2070) in Europe, under two emissions scenarios (RCP4.5 and RCP8.5) 
Source: EEA, 201936 
 
 
Figure VII-4: Projected changes in heavy precipitation in winter and summer. Projected changes in heavy 
precipitation (in  %) in winter and summer from 1971-2000 to 2071–2100 for the RCP8.5 scenario based 
on the ensemble mean of different regional climate models (RCMs) nested in different general circulation 
models (GCMs).  Source: EEA, 201937 
 
                                                          
36 EEA (2019a) ‘Heavy precipitation in Europe. Available at: https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-
maps/indicators/precipitation-extremes-in-europe-3/assessment-1. Accessed: 29 April 2021. 
37 
EEA 
(2019b) 
Meteorological 
and 
hydrological 
droughts 
in 
Europe. 
Available 
at:  
https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/indicators/river-flow-drought-3/assessment

=== Page 64 (OCR from images) ===

[page_64_img_1]
Projected change in meteorological drought frequency between 1981-2010 and 2041-2070 under two climate scenarios

Number of events per 10 years

— | © 500 1000 1500km
s os s At least two-third of No data Outside scope
wy es the simulations used
oss a SoS o agree on the sign of change

© European Commission, Source: Joint Research Centre

[page_64_img_2]
Winter

=== Page 65 (selectable text) ===
183 
Figure VII-5: Forest fire danger in the present climate and projected changes under two climate change scenarios, 
one reaching 2℃ of warming and another high emissions scenario. Source: EEA, 2019 
 
1.3.3.     Trends in ecosystem condition 
In chapter 2.1 the situation of the state of biodiversity and ecosystems is described but in the 
context of the baseline it is important to point to the strong and continuing negative trends in 
the status of protected habitats and species that are reported by Member States every 6 years 
under the Habitats and Birds Directives and last reported in 2019. Aggregated on EU level it 
can be said that the that the number of habitats which are reported as deteriorating is much 
higher than the one of habitats improving in spite of the measures taken under current 
legislation. This pattern looks very similar for the conservation status trends of protected 
species under the Habitats Directive: the negative trends outweigh by far the positive ones. 
This points to the assumption taken that even with some improvements in the 
implementation of legislation and new voluntary targets set in the Biodiversity Strategy 
to 2030 this relationship is unlikely to dramatically change in future. 
Figure VII-6: Trends in conservation status of Habitats Directive Annex I habitats grouped by to ecosystem for the 
reporting period 2013-2018  
Source: State of Nature report, 2020 
 
1.4.Recent legislative developments

=== Page 65 (OCR from images) ===

[page_65_img_1]
villa

Overall weather-driven forest fire danger in the present climate and projected changes under two climate change scenarios

Fire weather index

__ Se
ob © © P S © ©
s ca s ie 2” > ”

Projected change in fire weather index

%

Bs)

bo OPS P ©
Sg ED” Pg &
SLM LM 7

No data

Outside coverage

Co} 750
a oe

1.500 km

=== Page 66 (selectable text) ===
184 
1.4.1. International policy  
The expectation is that at the CBD COP15 an ambitious new global strategic policy framework 
will be adopted with different goals and action targets which will require additional nature 
restoration efforts to be achieved by CBD parties38. The EU and all its 27 Member States are 
Parties to the CBD. However, based on previous experience, in the field of biodiversity policy, 
international agreements provide the context for EU action rather than being a driver of EU 
action in itself.  International policy strengthens the imperative for EU to act - including to set 
an example for other countries to follow - but will not drive change by itself and therefore will 
not have a significant impact on the magnitude of nature restoration in the EU towards 2030 
(without additional action). For this reason, international policy is not further discussed here.  
 
1.4.2. European Green Deal  
With the European Green Deal (EGD) biodiversity has become a political priority at the highest 
political level in the EU. The EGD sets out a strategy for a wide range of initiatives which have 
the potential to contribute to addressing some of the biggest drivers in ecosystems degradation. 
The most important initiatives, and their likely impact on biodiversity trends and nature 
restoration, are briefly outlined in this section. The ecosystem-specific sections and annexes to 
this report contain more in-depth analysis of impacts of these initiatives. 
Potentially the most far-reaching initiative for the period up to 2050 is the European Climate 
Law which legally commits all EU MS to achieve climate neutrality by 2050. This has spurred 
a range of initiatives to integrate this new ambition in existing and new laws and policies39. 
The Impact Assessment accompanying the Communication of the Commission on Stepping up 
Europe’s 2030 climate ambition40, included modelling of the impacts of reducing Europe’s 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions with 50 or 55% relative to 1990 levels by 2030 in line with 
the new political ambition under the EGD. The "MIX" scenario, leading to a 55% reduction in 
GHG emissions, adopted a combination of increased ambition for regulatory-based measures 
and expanded carbon pricing, compared to a baseline scenario. Under this scenario, forest area 
is expected to expand by 20,000 km2 per decade, which equates to around 1.5% of forest area 
based on 2018 Corine land cover. Importantly however, some of this afforestation is for future 
supply of woody biomass and there is also a limited increase in the proportion of forest under 
intensive management. Therefore the likely restoration benefits for forest ecosystems will 
likely be limited without stronger safeguards for biodiversity. In addition, there may be net 
negative benefits from a biodiversity perspective if high nature value non-forest ecosystems 
such as (semi-)natural grasslands or wetlands are converted to plantation forest.   
                                                          
38 
UN 
CBD 
(2020) 
Updated 
zero 
draft 
of 
the 
post-2020 
Global 
Biodiversity 
Framework: 
https://www.cbd.int/article/zero-draft-update-august-2020  
39 Legislative train schedule for the ‘Fit for 55 Package under the European Green Deal’: 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/legislative-train/theme-a-european-green-deal/package-fit-for-55  
40 European Commission (2020) SWD(2020) 176 final with the Impact Assessment accompanying the 
Communication on Stepping up Europe’s 2030 climate ambition. Available at: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52020SC0176

=== Page 67 (selectable text) ===
185 
Perhaps the more important feature in the climate targets modelling is the increased production 
of energy crops for sustainable advanced biofuels and other types of bioenergy after 2030, 
using land currently occupied by croplands, non-productive grasslands, agriculture land set 
aside, fallowed or abandoned. This suggests that rather than driving widespread restoration of 
ecosystems, there is rather the potential for expansion of bioenergy production which if 
managed unsustainably could undermine  restoration objectives of converted ecosystem types: 
the conversion of large areas of land could lead to loss of extent and deterioration in the 
ecological condition of agro-ecosystems, wetland, steppe, heath and shrub habitats and 
possibly other ecosystem types. 
Arguably the most relevant element of EU climate policy for nature restoration is the review 
of the EU regulation on land use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF) with the aim of 
increasing this sector’s efforts to reduce emissions and maintain and enhance carbon 
removals41. The impact assessment accompanying the legal proposal to amend the LULUCF 
regulation42 refers specifically to the announced proposal for a legally binding instrument for 
nature restoration under the Biodiversity Strategy to 2030 and makes clear that nature 
restoration makes a significant contribution to climate action. A wide range of land-based 
mitigation options including protection and restoration of natural ecosystems, sustainable land 
management practices (including agroecology), agroforestry, crop rotation with leguminous 
crops, fire management, soil management, sustainable forest management, reduced erosion and 
increasing soil organic matter do not increase competition for land. However, afforestation for 
intensive bioenergy production, including monocultures replacing natural forests and high 
nature value farmlands, could increase the demand for land conversion, with potentially 
negative ecological consequences. These trade-offs and synergies between woody biomass for 
energy production and biodiversity in the EU were the subject of a recent analysis by the JRC43 
which identified as win-win forest management options the removal of slash (fine, woody 
debris) below thresholds defined according to local conditions, and afforestation of former 
arable land with mixed forest or naturally regenerating forests. It also cautioned against lose-
lose pathways for biodiversity and climate including the removal of coarse woody debris, 
removal of low stumps, and conversion of primary or natural forests into plantations. As the 
report rightly concluded, which measures are dis- or encouraged in different EU MS is a 
political one. Which trajectory MS will take, and how their combined action will add up 
towards impact on EU-wide nature restoration outcomes is hard to forecast. What is clear that 
the potential of positive win-wins is very significant, but that without explicit articulation of 
such win-wins in national/regional policy and land/forest management practice, and in the 
                                                          
41 European Commission Better Regulation initiative ‘Land use, land use change & forestry – review of EU rules’: 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/12657-Land-use-land-use-change-&-
forestry-review-of-EU-rules_en  
42 European Commission (2021) 609 final with the Impact Assessment report accompanying the proposal to 
amend Regulations (EU) 2018/841 as regards the scope, simplifying the compliance rules, setting out the 
targets of the Member States for 2030 and committing to the collective achievement of climate neutrality by 
2035 in the land use, forestry and agriculture sector, and (EU) 2018/1999 as regards improvement in 
monitoring, reporting, tracking of progress and review. Available at: 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/revision-regulation-ghg-land-use-forestry_with-annex_en.pdf    
43 Camia et al. (2021), “The use of woody biomass for energy production in the EU”

=== Page 68 (selectable text) ===
186 
absence clear biodiversity safeguards, the net benefits to biodiversity objectives may in practice 
be only limited.   
Another review which may impact on restoration action towards 2030 is a foreseen revision of 
the Renewable Energy Directive (RED) which intends to minimise the use of crop- and 
wood-based biofuels, which could reduce pressures on forest and agro-ecosystems by setting 
higher minimum environmental standards which has the potential to contribute to the recovery 
of these ecosystems. In summary, although these climate polices will overall help reduce 
pressures on ecosystems, and may to a certain degree contribute to passive restoration, it must 
be borne in mind that their primary purpose is to reduce carbon emissions, and not explicitly 
the improvement of ecosystem health nor halting biodiversity loss. Thus, on their own climate 
policies will contribute to alleviate pressures on ecosystems, but on their own will be greatly 
insufficient to restore ecosystems to good condition.    
Besides the intention to set legally binding targets for nature restoration (which this study 
supports), the EU Biodiversity Strategy for 203044 also contains other proposed objectives 
and initiatives which -if implemented- have the potential to contribute to the recovery of 
ecosystems. Firstly, the three protected areas targets to increase the share of protected areas to 
30 % on land and at sea, to strictly-protect 10 % of protected areas and to effectively manage 
them is likely to result in important passive restoration action. The increase in protected area 
would be particularly ground-breaking in the marine environment, in which protected area 
would more than double (+173 %). Stricter protection could bring important benefits to certain 
ecosystems, for example in remaining old-growth forests as well as marine ecosystems, which 
mainly rely on protection measures to recover (passive restoration). Furthermore, the largest 
positive impact of the three targets in terms of nature restoration across ecosystems would most 
likely be a concerted effort on management effectiveness, if it is supported with adequate 
resources to fill existing knowledge and capacity gaps in implementing authorities, as well as 
with sufficient funding for the implementation of conservation measures. The new EU Forest 
Strategy announced in the EU Biodiversity Strategy and published in July 2021 reiterates its 
objectives on EU forests, and includes a specific priority of protecting, restoring and enlarging 
them. These are supported by a range of announced measures, such as protecting old growth 
and primary forsts and planting 3 billion trees which can contribute to meeting the EU nature 
restoration. However, as most of these are voluntary, the contribution will likely be relatively 
limited. The Regulation on deforestation and forest degradation proposed by the 
Commission in November 2021 can be expected to reduce deforestation and forest degradation, 
but it does not include objectives on ecosystem restoration.  
The Farm to Fork Strategy45 was published on the same day as the EU Biodiversity Strategy 
and shares some of its commitments, e.g. in relation to reducing pesticide- and nutrient 
pollution. Unlike the EU Biodiversity Strategy, it does not include targets on active protection 
or restoration of landscape features over 10 % of the land, such as hedgerows and fallow land 
on farmland. However, it does include a series of targets that could provide important 
                                                          
44 
European 
Commission 
web 
page 
on 
the 
Biodiversity 
strategy 
for 
2030: 
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/strategy/biodiversity-strategy-2030_en  
45 European Commission web page on the Farm to Fork Strategy: https://ec.europa.eu/food/farm2fork_en

=== Page 69 (selectable text) ===
187 
contributions to improving environmental conditions in conventionally managed farmland e.g., 
reducing the overall use of and risk of chemical pesticides and the use of more hazardous 
pesticides by 50 % by 2030, reducing nutrient losses into the environment and increasing the 
coverage of organic farming to 25 % of the EU’s agricultural land by 2030. If the Farm to Fork 
Strategy’s targets will be met, the reduced pollution pressures resulting from meeting these 
targets will improve basic environmental conditions in agro-ecosystems and have further 
positive passive restoration benefits on other ecosystem types. Nonetheless the targets do not 
reverse other key drivers of degradation of agro-ecosystems such as the loss of (semi-) natural 
grassland and high-biodiversity habitat in and around cropland. In addition the targets set in 
the Farm to Fork Strategy are currently not binding. Therefore the Strategy’s overall positive 
impact on nature restoration objectives will likely be modest, in particular if targets are not 
operationalised and met in national/regional agricultural policy and- practice.    
Other Green Deal initiatives relevant for nature restoration are the Zero Pollution Action 
Plan46, which includes  a specific commitment to reduce by 25% the EU ecosystems where air 
pollution threatens biodiversity by 2030. By reducing pollution pressures this is likely to 
contribute to some degree of passive restoration, but not enough to restore ecosystem condition 
to the degrees required.  The EU Strategy on Adaptation to Climate Change47 which 
includes a priority of promoting nature-based solutions for adaptation develop their financial 
case and continue to encourage and support Member States to roll them out in different ways 
such as guidance and EU funding. However, given that these actions will be voluntary, these 
contributions are likely to be small.   
1.4.3. EU Agricultural, Fisheries and Maritime Policies  
Given the large share of ecosystems in Europe that are under agricultural management, the 
implementation of EU agricultural policy will continue to significantly shape the trajectory of 
biodiversity trends in the EU in the years to come. It is not possible to predict exactly how the 
changes in the new CAP compared to the previous CAP may affect the trend in (agro-) 
ecosystems. They have the potential to do so if they, for example, lead to larger areas of 
grassland being protected from ploughing, a reduction in inputs such as pesticides, herbicides 
and excess nutrients, and an increase in the area of semi-natural habitats that are subject tailored 
and targeted agri-environment climate interventions. A Member State with strong 
environmental ambitions could use the new measures to achieve a great deal of progress. 
However, all Member States face competing priorities, and the 2014-20 experience of greening 
measures is that they have made a limited contribution to improving the environmental 
performance of farming. The experience so far has revealed limitations in the extent of 
agriculture funding (EAGF, EAFRD) effectively dedicated to nature restoration. Unless serious 
                                                          
46 European Commission (2021) COM(2021) 400 final - Pathway to a Healthy Planet for All. EU Action Plan: 
'Towards Zero Pollution for Air, Water and Soil'. Available at:  https://ec.europa.eu/environment/strategy/zero-
pollution-action-plan  
47 European Commission (2021) COM(2021) 82 final - Forging a climate-resilient Europe - the new EU Strategy 
on 
Adaptation 
to 
Climate 
Change. 
Available 
at:  
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_21_663

=== Page 70 (selectable text) ===
188 
efforts are put into improving the use of these funds, it is expected that they would not be 
changing the currently observed negative trends in ecosystems condition. 
Despite some progress towards sustainable fisheries in the EU found in the evaluation of the 
EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020 following the adoption of the new Common Fisheries Policy 
in 201348, the evaluation also found that certain fish stocks remain overfished and/or are outside 
safe biological limits and fisheries impacts on biodiversity remains high, for example on 
benthic habitats through bottom trawling and on slowly maturing but keystone species such as 
rays and sharks. As a result, the impact of fisheries and fishing practises on ecosystems 
remained a key concern in the EU Biodiversity Strategy (BDS) for 2030. The EU Nature 
Restoration Plan in the Strategy includes a specific commitment to “substantially reduce the 
negative impacts on sensitive species and habitats, including on the seabed through fishing … 
activities, to achieve good environmental status”. The Strategy aims to achieve this through 
application of an ecosystem-based management approach under relevant EU legislation 
(MSFD, CFP, MSP) and mentions specifically the national marine spatial plans under the MSP 
Directive in which Member States should formalise Marine Protected Areas and other area-
based conservation measures. Furthermore, by summer 2022, a new action plan to conserve 
fisheries resources and protect marine ecosystems will point out where action is needed to 
address the by-catch of sensitive species and adverse impacts on sensitive habitats through 
technical measures such as area closures, gear changes and mitigation measures for sensitive 
species. Importantly, the action plan will also focus on key enabling measures such as 
strengthening the implementation of existing policies, improving the availability and quality of 
marine knowledge and information, and identify the possibilities under the EU funding 
instruments for a fair and just transition to support the objectives of the action plan.  
While these ongoing policy developments will focus minds on ecological objectives in the 
marine environment, and they may contribute to a certain degree of contribution to passive 
restoration, it remains to be seen in how far they will result in larger scale improvement in 
ecosystem condition and specific, targeted restoration outcomes. Progress in implementing the 
MSP is significantly behind schedule and so-far poorly aligned with new EU commitments on 
protected areas and restoration. While the reformed CFP since 2013 provides conservation and 
management tools to implement measures to support restoration, the implementation of key 
elements such as the landing obligation and restricting fisheries in areas of ecological 
importance such as Natura 2000 sites has been slow. Helping achieve the objectives of the 
MSFD and of the Birds and Habitats Directives forms part of the CFP’s objectives, in particular 
through reaching fully sustainable fisheries, setting fish stock recovery areas and setting 
conservation measures for complying with the EU’s environmental legislation. Hisorically, the 
CFP has focussed on the socio-economic dimension of fisheries, while the reformed  CFP of 
2013 has added environmental sustainability as one of its key objectives. Under the 
regionalisation process, certain Member States proposed conservation measures for protected 
areas and minimising the risk of by-catch of protected species. Considering the urgency to act, 
progress is considered slow and additional action would be required under the nature 
                                                          
48 For example in relation to total allowable catches (TACs), multi-annual plans, landing obligations, technical 
measures and discard plans.

=== Page 71 (selectable text) ===
189 
restoration law to step up the recovery of marine ecosystems. Under the current rules, this is 
going to continue in future and despite the hopeful developments since the adoption of the 
EU Green Deal and the EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030, the expectation is that 
ecosystem condition  will only slightly improve in the period to 2030 under the baseline 
scenario. This would be either through indirect means such as contributions to passive 
restoration, or through more directed actions, which as experience shows are not likely to have 
much effect due to their voluntary nature.  
1.4.4. Investment  
As explained in Chapter 3, insufficient investment in ecological restoration is one of the key 
barriers to action, even for restoration required under legislation such as under the Nature 
Directives and the Water Framework Directive. There are some reasons to expect increases 
both in budgets available for nature restoration as well as their more targeted application, partly 
enabled by progress in implementation as outlined in section 4.2.2. Firstly, the decision to 
invest 7,5 % of the EU’s Multi-annual Financial Framework (MFF) in biodiversity by 2024, 
and 10 % by 2027, will increase the overall portfolio available for biodiversity. The European 
Commission is developing an improved system to track biodiversity-related investments in the 
EU budget. Another improvement under the current MFF is that the budget for the EU LIFE 
programme increased by about 60 % compared to the previous MFF cycle, which will result in 
a significant increase in targeted EU-funded restoration projects.  
At the same time, there are concerns that the largest EU investment pillar for biodiversity, could 
reduce in practice if Member States continue to use the flexibility that CAP implementation 
provides to prioritize productive measures and investments which often do not or insufficiently 
deliver on biodiversity objectives or even hamper them. Moreover, Prioritized Action 
Frameworks for Natura 2000 indicate that funds allocated by EU and Member States have been 
insufficient to meet needs in the current period. Therefore, it remains to be seen if these slight 
improvements will be sufficient to bridge the funding gap. 
Lastly, the Biodiversity Strategy for 2030 mentions that a dedicated ‘EUR 10 billion natural-
capital and circular economy investment initiative’ will be established, building on InvestEU 
and operated by the EIB Group in cooperation with other public and private investment teams. 
Also here it remains to be seen if this will mobilise substantial amounts of private investments 
for ecosystem restoration, in light of limited success of the Natural Capital Financing Facility.  
1.4.5. National developments  
An initial and short assessment of national political, policy and legal developments on nature 
restoration and related fields was carried out as part of this impact assessment. This is described 
in Annex XI. From this it can be predicted that for some EU Member States, national policies 
would be likely to have a positive effects on biodiversity trends and nature restoration. 
However, evidence shows that MS activities are not evenly distributed across the EU and also 
tend to show degrees of difference in effort and resultant action. Furthermore, in a number of 
MS, there was little evidence that could be found of restoration activity supported by national 
policies.   All this goes to indicate that one could expect rather small, and unevenly distributed 
efforts of restoration following from the contributions of national policies.

=== Page 72 (selectable text) ===
190 
1.5. Discussion & conclusions 
The baseline analysis for specific ecosystems as well as the wider cross-cutting considerations 
presented above lead to three main findings for the baseline. First, socio-economic and 
environmental pressures on ecosystem are likely to increase. Second, ongoing restoration 
activities are limited and, third, they are likely to only slightly increase in future, despite recent 
policy and legal initiatives. We expand on these findings below. 
Socio-economic drivers. In the period to 2050, the EU population is expected to continue to 
grow, albeit at a reduced rate compared to the recent past. This combined with global 
population growth and wealth growth will increase demand for natural resources and pressure 
on productive land use in agriculture, forestry and across other ecosystems. In contrast, 
agricultural abandonment will continue in remote and less productive agricultural areas, 
because of socio-economic factors and rural depopulation.    
Environmental drivers: the impacts of climate change on ecosystems are increasing. In the 
future, across most of Europe, drought event frequency, heavy winter precipitation and forest 
fire risk are all projected to increase, Important cross-cutting pressures such nitrogen pollution 
will decline further but will be partly offset by accelerating pressures from climate change. 
Ongoing restoration. As estimated by Eftec49 in 2017, areas restored varied by ecosystem but 
taken together, were insubstantial. When extrapolated to the area restored over the 9-year 
period covering 2022-2030, they represent less than 1% or less of total ecosystem extent.At 
the same time, from the baseline assessments of specific ecosystems outlined in Annex VI, 
semi-natural grasslands, heathlands and other semi-natural agricultural habitats, and some 
mires as well as coastal wetlands, would be expected to continue their limited decline. With 
increasing flood risks we expect that the relative priority given to wetlands and rivers and lake 
ecosystems in restoration efforts will further increase compared to other ecosystems. Similarly, 
we expect increased ambition to reduce soil-based GHG emissions and increased investments 
for land-based climate change mitigation action, including wetland restoration through re-
wetting. However, these increases if based on voluntary commitments will likely fall short of 
needed effort, and more importantly will not deliver on the restoration of other ecosystem types 
in scope.  
Recent policy and legal initiatives. The European Green Deal makes biodiversity a political 
priority in the EU. The European Climate Law and within that the review of EU regulation on 
LULUCF and the Renewable Energy Directive, if implemented effectively, have the potential 
to contribute to ecosystem recovery. The EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030 will, if 
implemented, also contribute to improvements in the condition and coverage of European 
ecosystems. The Farm to Fork Strategy makes commitments to reducing pressures on 
ecosystems, especially agroecosystems. Higher ambition for biodiversity in agro-ecosystems 
                                                          
49 Eftec (2017) Technical support in relation to the promotion of ecosystem restoration in the context of the EU 
Biodiversity Strategy to 2020. Available at: 
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/nature/pdf/promotion_of_ecosystem_restoration_in_the_context_of_the_EU
_biodiversity_strategy_report%20.zip

=== Page 73 (selectable text) ===
191 
is also a possibility under the CAP, although it will ultimately depend on the choices made by 
Member States and it is not possible to assess the impacts of the CAP reform as the reform is 
still under negotiation. In summary, the is more favourable for nature restoration compared to 
the recent past. This will likely result in higher restoration action than would be expected based 
on recent experience and trend.  
Considering ongoing and growing pressures on ecosystems and in light of the lack of voluntary 
implementation of ‘Target 2’ of the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020, we conclude that the 
baseline restoration effort is likely to remain at an insufficient scale to meet restoration needs. 
Furthermore, restoration is likely to happen too slowly to reverse the present, steep biodiversity 
declines and to underpin ecosystem resilience in the face of climate change. 
Contributions to restoration are likely to mainly be passive restoration and at insufficient levels 
to restore ecosystem to good health. Active restoration would only be addressed, and if at all, 
through voluntary actions, and with little expected impact.  
For these reasons, we have considered a ‘conservative’ baseline in our calculations in which 
the ‘full’ restoration needs observed today will not be addressed by the existing policies and 
legislations outlined above.  Therefore, these needs have to be addressed by EU targeted action 
on restoration. 
In summary, the baseline analysis sees several positive developments, but the continuous 
increase in ecosystem degradation may outweigh their benefits. Without additional action to 
accelerate progress on nature restoration across different ecosystems, biodiversity and 
ecosystems would decline further. As the analysis also demonstrated, there is a large potential 
to improve existing action with a more binding framework. 
 
2. 
OPTION 2: OVERARCHING LEGALLY BINDING TARGET COVERING ALL OR MOST EU 
ECOSYSTEMS 
If there were a single overarching target for ecosystem restoration rather than individual, 
ecosystem-specific targets, Member States would have greater freedom and flexibility in 
choosing which ecosystems to prioritise for restoration. 
It is important to note that the main flexibility would be in the prioritisation and sequencing of 
ecosystem restoration since both the overarching target and ecosystem-specific targets would 
require restoration of all (or almost all) ecosystems by 2050. However, Member States would 
be free to choose which ecosystems to prioritise at the start of this period and which to leave 
for later. 
Having an overarching rather than ecosystem-specific targets would have advantages in terms 
of: 
 Subsidiarity: Member States would have greater flexibility in meeting the targets and 
could prioritise restoration actions according to their needs and circumstances;

=== Page 74 (selectable text) ===
192 
 Cost-effectiveness: Member States could prioritise ecosystems with lower costs or 
higher benefit-cost ratios, which would save costs and/or enhance net benefits in the 
short to medium term; 
 Contribution to policy objectives: Member States could prioritise restoration of 
ecosystems which made greatest contribution to their policy objectives in the short to 
medium term. This could include, for example, contribution to climate mitigation 
targets or addressing more local priorities such as reducing flood risk. 
 Political visibility and accessibility: A single, easy to communicate legally -binding 
target would facilitate building broad awareness of new EU political and political 
ambition on nature restoration. Since there is something in it for everyone, it could help 
ensure buy-in across stakeholder groups and could help put biodiversity on par with 
‘headline’ climate targets such as achieving climate neutrality.  
 
The main disadvantage of an overarching rather than ecosystem-specific targets would be that 
it might be expected to result in uncertain and uneven rates of restoration of ecosystems. There 
is a risk that it could result in “picking of low hanging fruit”, i.e., prioritisation of restoration 
of ecosystems that are easiest and most inexpensive to restore. The historic bias in designating 
protected areas in places which were facing little anthropogenic pressure and therefore had a 
low opportunity cost is a good example of this phenomenon50. Another example are 
experiences in implementing Greening under the EU’s Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) 
where large flexibility in implementation options led to high inefficiencies from a biodiversity 
perspective as authorities and farmers prioritized the economically most advantageous options 
with little to no biodiversity outcomes51. While such flexibility could have some advantages in 
reducing short term costs, there would potentially be adverse impacts on: 
 Biodiversity: Biodiversity restoration requires coordinated international action as 
ecosystems and species do not respect national borders. This is recognised in the Birds 
and Habitats Directive and the biogeographical approach in the latter. Therefore, rather 
than restoring species and habitats according to the EU priorities and biogeographical 
requirements, prioritising at a Member State level would undermine the ability to 
achieve coordinated restoration of ecosystems and the recovery of species at a 
population level. If some species continued to decline, this could reduce progress in 
meeting overall biodiversity objectives, and some species might face threat of 
extinction through delays in restoration of their habitats. 
 Future costs: Prioritising ecosystems with lower costs of restoration could increase the 
costs of future action. 
 Effectiveness: Focusing on ecosystems which are easiest and cheapest to restore would 
potentially increase the risks of failing to deliver against the targets, by leaving the 
greatest challenges to be addressed in future years. 
                                                          
50 See, for example, Joppa, L. & Pfaff A., High and Far: Biases in the Location of Protected Areas, 2009. 
51 Alliance Environnement, Evaluation of the impacts of the CAP on habitats, landscapes, biodiversity, Report to 
the European Commission, 2019.

=== Page 75 (selectable text) ===
193 
 Certainty: There would be greater uncertainty relating to the restoration actions taking 
place across the EU, and their likely outcomes; 
 Co-ordination: Variations and uncertainties in action and outcomes at Member State 
level would make it more difficult to co-ordinate action across the EU, to share evidence 
and resources, and to implement co-ordinated action across borders.  
 EU Added value: The absence of co-ordinated action might reduce the ability to 
achieve EU goals, and therefore the justification for EU funding; and undermine 
confidence amongst Member States that they can adopt ambitious goals that are 
comparable to others. 
 
2.1 
Factors affecting Prioritisation of Ecosystem Restoration Action 
The flexibility inherent in the overarching target option makes it challenging to assess likely 
implementation scenarios and therefore likely impacts. The prioritisation of ecosystems as 
described in the baseline scenario would likely still be similar, however the significant increase 
in effort required in terms of area restored would increase the scope and magnitude of impacts 
and likely implementation pathways. Therefore, evaluation was made to map the likely 
decision-making factors that would guide the direction of implementing actions. If there was 
an overarching target instead of ecosystem-specific targets, we might expect Member States to 
prioritise restoration of ecosystems according to one or more of the following criteria: 
 
 Ecosystem extent: Ecosystems with greater area requiring restoration will make up 
a greater proportion of an overall restoration target. 
 Technical feasibility: Member States would be unlikely to prioritise ecosystems 
which are technically difficult to restore, or where there is a high risk of failure; 
 Cost: With an overarching target, and given limits on funding, there would be a 
tendency to prioritise ecosystems with lower restoration costs; 
 Benefit-cost ratio: There would be merit in prioritising restoration of ecosystems 
which offer greatest benefits, in terms of the value of ecosystem services, relative 
to costs of restoration; 
 Opportunity costs/stakeholder resistance: There may be a tendency to avoid 
restoring ecosystems in situations where this has high opportunity costs (e.g. 
because it restricts opportunities for development or food production) and meets 
resistance from stakeholders (e.g. farmers, fishers and developers); 
 Need for co-ordinated international action: With a variety of priorities and 
approaches at Member State level, it might be more difficult to co-ordinate 
restoration actions across borders, potentially prioritising restoration of ecosystems 
within national borders; 
 Contribution to climate mitigation and adaptation: We might expect Member 
States to prioritise restoration of ecosystems that are particularly sensitive to the 
direct and indirect effects of climate change as well as ecosystems where this

=== Page 76 (selectable text) ===
194 
contributes most to specific policy agendas, including in relation to climate change 
mitigation and adaptation. 
 
Table VII-1 summarises these issues with respect to the different ecosystem types. The table 
indicates that these different criteria may have varying effects on the degree to which different 
ecosystems might be prioritised for restoration, and that there may be different responses by 
different Member States, according to the emphasis placed on different priorities (e.g. cost, 
stakeholder interests, climate change agenda) as well as the extent of each ecosystem in each 
Member State. 
2.2 
Summary 
In conclusion, the introduction of an overarching target would have several important 
advantages with regards to subsidiarity, cost-effectiveness (at least in the short-term), 
contribution to policy objectives, political visibility and accessibility. However, by itself it 
would most likely fail to restore biodiversity at a level required to meet EU-wide and 
international biodiversity objectives due to an implementation effort that would not be 
well--balanced to restoration needs of all ecosystems, of insufficient coordination between 
EU-Member States on EU-wide restoration needs and challenges and required integration with 
e.g. implementation of the CAP and CFP, low political certainty of restoration outcomes and 
therefore accountability which may risk undermine EU added value in biodiversity policy.

=== Page 77 (selectable text) ===
Table VII-1: Overview table of likely dimensions impacting on the prioritisation of certain ecosystem types over others in implementing an overarching target 
Key: Green=Criterion is likely to encourage restoration of this ecosystem within an overall target; Orange=Criterion may have a moderate or mixed effect in encouraging restoration of 
the ecosystem; Red=Criterion may discourage restoration of this ecosystem within an overall target 
Please note: The scope of this impact assessment also includes pollinators and soils which, due their cross-cutting nature, were not included as a separate ecosystem in this table. Their 
restoration needs would however need be integrated in the implementation of the overarching target under different ecosystem types.  
Ecosystem 
Ecosystem 
extent 
Technical 
feasibility 
Need 
for 
coordinated 
international 
action 
Cost 
per 
hectare 
Cost: 
benefit 
ratio 
Opportunity 
cost/ 
stakeholder 
resistance 
Contribution 
to 
climate 
mitigation and 
adaptation 
Contribution 
to 
disaster 
prevention and 
protection 
Overall 
assessment 
Agro-
ecosystems 
High 
Strong evidence 
base and good 
experience 
through 
agri-
environment 
interventions 
Moderate 
Moderate 
for 
semi-natural 
habitats, 
high 
for 
improved 
grasslands and 
croplands  
Good 
B:C 
ratios 
Would support 
extensive 
farming 
systems. High 
opportunity 
costs 
for 
intensively 
farmed 
areas, 
which 
could 
give 
rise 
to 
resistance 
without 
adequate 
incentives 
under the CAP  
Moderate 
potential 
for 
carbon storage 
and 
sequestration; 
high 
contribution to 
adaptation 
by 
increasing soil 
health 
Moderate: 
reducing 
bare 
ground, erosion, 
soil compaction 
and 
tillage 
reduces run-off 
rates 
and 
flooding 
and 
landslides 
Extensive 
ecosystem with 
potential 
for 
large 
scale 
restoration; 
depends 
on 
incentivising 
farmers 
to 
change 
land 
management 
practices under 
area-related 
interventions 
including agri-
environment 
interventions 
Forest 
High 
Restoration 
needs 
and 
practices 
are 
relatively 
well 
understood, but 
Moderate 
Moderate 
per 
hectare costs 
Good 
B:C 
ratios 
Moderate 
– 
main trade-off 
is with more 
Strong carbon 
sequestration 
potential 
through forest 
restoration and 
Restoration 
involves 
significant 
capital 
costs, 
but likely to be

=== Page 78 (selectable text) ===
196 
Ecosystem 
Ecosystem 
extent 
Technical 
feasibility 
Need 
for 
coordinated 
international 
action 
Cost 
per 
hectare 
Cost: 
benefit 
ratio 
Opportunity 
cost/ 
stakeholder 
resistance 
Contribution 
to 
climate 
mitigation and 
adaptation 
Contribution 
to 
disaster 
prevention and 
protection 
Overall 
assessment 
recovery 
takes 
many decades 
commercial 
forestry 
re-creation 
[adaptation] 
a priority given 
extensive area 
of 
degraded 
forest, 
and 
potential 
to 
contribute 
to 
climate agenda  
Heathland 
and scrub 
w 
Restoration 
needs 
and 
practices 
are 
relatively 
well 
understood 
Moderate 
Relatively low 
costs 
per 
hectare 
Good 
B:C 
ratios 
Low 
– 
relatively 
low 
value land with 
few alternative 
uses 
Strong 
carbon 
sequestration 
potential 
through 
restoration,  
Moderate: 
reducing 
bare 
ground 
and 
overgrazing, 
reduces run-off, 
flooding, 
erosion, 
and 
landslides. Risk 
of intense large 
fires 
can 
be 
reduced 
by 
grazing, 
scrub 
management 
and 
managed 
burning  
Likely to be 
prioritised 
because 
of 
relatively 
low 
restoration and 
opportunity 
costs; however, 
limited 
ecosystem area 
restricts 
its 
contribution to 
overall target 
Marine  
High 
Many 
habitats 
may be difficult 
to restore and/or 
restoration 
hampered 
by 
evidence 
gaps. 
High – the need 
for co-ordinated 
action could be 
a 
barrier 
to 
restoration 
without specific 
Variable 
– 
potential 
for 
extensive use of 
low 
cost, 
passive 
restoration 
Uncertain 
– 
difficult 
to 
assess 
with 
given evidence 
and may vary 
widely 
for 
Restoration 
may 
face 
significant 
resistance from 
fishing sector in 
response 
to 
Varies 
by 
marine habitats; 
significant 
uncertainties 
regarding 
impact 
of 
Only 
relevant 
for MS with a 
coastline; 
extent 
of 
marine 
ecosystem

=== Page 79 (selectable text) ===
197 
Ecosystem 
Ecosystem 
extent 
Technical 
feasibility 
Need 
for 
coordinated 
international 
action 
Cost 
per 
hectare 
Cost: 
benefit 
ratio 
Opportunity 
cost/ 
stakeholder 
resistance 
Contribution 
to 
climate 
mitigation and 
adaptation 
Contribution 
to 
disaster 
prevention and 
protection 
Overall 
assessment 
However, other 
habitats 
may 
require 
passive 
restoration only.  
marine 
ecosystem 
targets. 
techniques, 
while 
active 
restoration 
measures may 
be expensive. 
different 
restoration 
methods 
and 
habitats. 
May 
be strong B:C 
ratios 
where 
passive 
restoration 
applied. 
limits on fishing 
activity 
and 
perceived 
opportunity 
costs (at least in 
short term) 
restoration 
actions 
restoration 
uncertain due to 
significant 
knowledge 
gaps. Could be 
an 
attractive 
option 
for 
extensive 
marine habitats 
suitable 
for 
passive 
restoration, 
especially 
where 
resistance from 
fisheries sector 
does 
not 
present 
challenges. 
Peatlands and 
wetlands 
Low 
Re-wetting 
of 
most 
drained 
semi-natural 
peatland 
is 
straightforward, 
full restoration of 
highly degraded 
peatland 
is 
difficult 
Moderate 
Moderate 
per 
hectare costs 
Good 
B:C 
ratios 
Low for Annex 
1 habitats 
Exceptionally 
high 
potential 
for 
carbon 
storage 
and 
sequestration, 
improved water 
retention 
can 
also contribute 
to adaptation 
High in flood 
prone 
catchments 
where reversing 
drainage 
reduces run-off 
rates 
and 
downstream 
flooding  
Likely to be a 
priority 
for 
restoration for 
those MS with 
degraded 
peatlands, 
given 
strong 
climate

=== Page 80 (selectable text) ===
198 
Ecosystem 
Ecosystem 
extent 
Technical 
feasibility 
Need 
for 
coordinated 
international 
action 
Cost 
per 
hectare 
Cost: 
benefit 
ratio 
Opportunity 
cost/ 
stakeholder 
resistance 
Contribution 
to 
climate 
mitigation and 
adaptation 
Contribution 
to 
disaster 
prevention and 
protection 
Overall 
assessment 
mitigation 
benefits. 
Rivers 
and 
Lakes 
Low 
Technical 
challenges 
in 
barrier removal 
and 
floodplain 
restoration 
High – the need 
for co-ordinated 
action could be 
a 
barrier 
to 
restoration 
without specific 
freshwater 
ecosystem 
targets. 
High – often 
requiring 
substantial 
capital works 
High 
B:C 
ratios, 
given 
high ecosystem 
service values 
for freshwaters 
Opportunity 
costs 
are 
a 
barrier 
to 
floodplain 
restoration 
Relatively low 
priority 
for 
mitigation, but 
floodplain 
restoration 
plays important 
role 
in 
adaptation 
High 
– 
Restoring 
wetlands 
and 
floodplains can 
contribute 
to 
flood 
prevention and 
mitigation 
through 
improved 
connectivity 
Restoration has 
relatively high 
costs but offers 
strong 
benefit 
cost ratios; as 
freshwaters 
represent 
a 
small 
proportion 
of 
overall 
area, 
likely 
to 
be 
driven more by 
MS 
priorities 
than an overall 
target 
Urban 
w 
Significant 
technical 
challenges 
in 
unsealing 
land, 
recycling 
developed 
and 
contaminated 
sites 
Moderate 
High – costs of 
unsealing land, 
remediating 
contaminated 
sites, changing 
construction 
practices 
High B:C ratios 
for urban green 
space, 
especially 
through health 
and wellbeing 
benefits 
High 
land 
prices and many 
competing 
demands 
for 
land in urban 
areas 
Importance of 
urban 
green 
space, 
tree 
cover, 
sustainable 
drainage 
in 
climate change 
adaptation 
Limited 
land 
area and high 
costs, but also 
high 
benefits. 
Urban 
ecosystem 
restoration 
more likely to 
be driven by 
MS 
priorities 
than 
its

=== Page 81 (selectable text) ===
199 
Ecosystem 
Ecosystem 
extent 
Technical 
feasibility 
Need 
for 
coordinated 
international 
action 
Cost 
per 
hectare 
Cost: 
benefit 
ratio 
Opportunity 
cost/ 
stakeholder 
resistance 
Contribution 
to 
climate 
mitigation and 
adaptation 
Contribution 
to 
disaster 
prevention and 
protection 
Overall 
assessment 
contribution to 
an overarching 
target.

=== Page 82 (selectable text) ===
3. 
OPTION 3 AND OPTION 4 
See individual thematic assessments in Annex VI, summary table in Annex III,  as well 
as Chapter 6.  
4. 
COSTS OF ENABLING MEASURES 
Enabling measures will include:  
a) Surveys of ecosystems to establish extent and condition, where this is 
not known;  
b) Development of national restoration plans;  
c) Administration of restoration measures; 
d) Monitoring of restored ecosystems; 
e) Reporting progress against restoration targets. 
 
The administrative costs of these measures can be estimated by estimating the number of 
days work involved for each, and costing that at a standard time cost per day (following 
the Standard Cost Model for quantification of administrative burdens, set out in the EU 
Better Regulation Guidelines and Toolbox).  
a) Ecosystem surveys 
Establishing the extent of restoration activity required depends on data on the extent and 
condition of the relevant ecosystems. There are currently significant data gaps, particularly 
regarding the extent of degraded ecosystems requiring restoration. The EEA Dashboard52 
indicates that the condition of approximately 732 516 km2 of Annex 1 habitats across the 
EU is unknown, and would need to be surveyed to determine restoration priorities. We 
assume a survey cost of EUR 15/ha surveyed, based on data for from the EMBAL survey53. 
This would give a total one-off survey cost of EUR 1 099 million across the EU. 
b) Development of national restoration plans 
Each Member State will be required to develop a national restoration plan. This will set 
out the current extent and condition of ecosystems, the pressures facing them, the targets 
for ecosystem restoration, the restoration measures required, the stakeholders involved, the 
resource needs and funding arrangements, and the arrangements for monitoring and 
reporting. 
                                                          
52 https://www.eea.europa.eu/themes/biodiversity/state-of-nature-in-the-eu/article-17-national-summary-
dashboards/condition-of-habitat. 
53 Costings for EMBAL assume 3 x 25 hectare plots are covered per day, with an average daily cost of EUR 
557 for skilled surveyors. If it is assumed that 50 % of surveyor time is spent in the field, this gives an 
average cost of EUR 15 per hectare.

=== Page 83 (selectable text) ===
201 
Each Plan could be subdivided into approx. 6 ecosystem types (e.g. marine and inter-tidal 
habitats; wetlands & peatlands; rivers & lakes; agro-ecosystems (including soils and 
pollinators); heaths etc; forests), presenting a specific plan for each ecosystem.   
The time and costs required for each Plan would vary by Member State, according to the 
extent of their ecosystems and the complexity of issues and restoration requirements. The 
average time requirements for each Member State Plan are estimated in Table VII-2. 
Table VII-2 Estimated time inputs for national restoration plans 
Requirement/ section 
Time input per ecosystem 
(days) 
Total days per plan (based 
on 6 ecosystems) 
Compile and present data on 
ecosystem extent, condition, 
pressures  
100 
600 
Define ecosystem restoration 
targets and actions 
50 
300 
Define resources and funding 
arrangements 
30 
180 
Define monitoring and 
reporting arrangements 
30 
180 
Public consultation/ 
engagement 
40 
240 
Compile overall national plan 
 
100 
Total time  
250 
1,500 
 
It is estimated that each National Restoration Plan (covering the 6 ecosystem types) would 
require total time inputs amounting to 1500 days on average, or 6.5 person years of work. 
In this assessment we apply a standard cost of EUR 317 per day – this includes salary and 
overhead costs and is based on the civil rate of EUR 300 per day for public servants applied 
in the Fitness Check of EU Environmental Monitoring and Reporting Obligations (ICF, 
2017), updated for inflation. 
Applying an average cost of EUR 317 per day would give an average cost of EUR 475 500 
per MS plan. The total for 27 Member State plans would amount to a one-off cost of 
EUR 12.8 million. 
c) Establishing an EU wide methodology, indicators and baselines for 
ecosystems and targets 
 
Further administrative effort is required to establish an EU wide methodology, indicators 
and baselines for targets for those ecosystems for which these are insufficiently developed. 
This includes targets for at least five ecosystems (e.g. marine, urban, soils, agro-
ecosystems, forests or others for which targets are yet not defined, as well as pollinators). 
The cost estimate for establishing an EU wide methodology, indicators and baselines for 
ecosystems is based on two methods: 
Method 1: based on experience with MSFD

=== Page 84 (selectable text) ===
202 
Based on experience of developing methodologies, baselines and indicators under the 
MSFD, it is estimated that this will require work over a period of 3-4 years with inputs 
from the European Commission, EU experts (EEA, JRC) and Member State officials. 
Over the 3-4 year time period, this is estimated to involve: 
• 1 EC staff member working full time to oversee the development of the EU 
wide methodology and indicators for each ecosystem [800 days per ecosystem] 
• 8 EU experts (EEA, JRC, DG ENV) spending an average of 25 days each on 
data analysis and indicator development [700 days per ecosystem] 
• 27 Member State experts spending 20 days per year each on meetings/ 
networks/ data inputs [1890 days per ecosystem].  
On this basis, total time inputs would amount to 3 390 days at a cost of EUR 1.07 million 
per indicator (based on a cost per day of EUR 317 as above). This would amount to a total 
one-off cost of EUR 5.35 million across the five ecosystems. 
Method 2: based on experience with MAES – Mapping and Assessing Ecosystem 
Services 
Since the mapping of ecosystems and assessment of ecosystem services started in 2016 
under MAES, the progress that was made by Member States until March 2021 is outlined 
by the light green in the figure below: 
Figure VII-7: Progress by MS to map ecosystems and its services under MAES 
Source: MAES

=== Page 84 (OCR from images) ===

[page_84_img_1]
Level of implementation (max=25)

y
a

eon
a 8

-
i)

5

oO

ESMERALDA MAES barometer March 2021

ew EYBE 5 ms a REZ™2
RYE RREREQE BRERSASRE RFR ERBARBS

2Z8

HE Baseline (Jan 2016) (Progress since Jan. 2016

Figure 14. Measuring successful implementation of MAES in the 27 EU member states, Norway and the UK. The ba-
rometer measures implementation of MAES based on a set of 25 yes/no questions that survey the progress made in
policy integration and research. A baseline was set in January 2016 and since then the progress has been measured
every six months until March 2021.

=== Page 85 (selectable text) ===
203 
At EU level, for JRC and EEA a total of 2 FTE per year has been occupied to write the 
guidance reports and to carry out the EU ecosystem assessment under MAES between 
2013 and 2020. 
MAES was mainly implemented by countries (but in some cases supported with EU or 
European Economic Area budgets). Every MS that made progress between 2016 and 2021 
(in the Figure VII-7) has used a budget between EUR 100,000 and 1.5 million. This range 
does not consider costs incurred by a number of MS (Finland, Netherlands, UK, Spain, 
Portugal, Luxembourg, Denmark, Sweden and Czechia) that did work relevant to MAES 
prior to 2016 or even 2013. For MS that primarily used national budgets, project costs are 
estimated to range between EUR 100 000 (Ireland, Italy, Poland, Slovakia, Cyprus, 
Slovenia and Malta), EUR 300 000 (Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania) and EUR 1 000 000-2 
000 000 (Hungary, Greece, Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia).  
Additional costs were covered by projects like H2020 ESMERALDA (3 000 000) and 
MESEU and Train (ENV service contracts, 400 000) to help MS implement MAES.  
Thus, the costs for implementing MAES (2013-2020) are estimated at EUR 16.5 million, 
which is comparable to the size of an average Horizon research project. 
Cost item 
Amount in EUR 
EU staff 
1.5 million  
MS own financing 
5 million 
EU support to member states 
(through EU budgets under LIFE, 
Regional, service contracts 
H2020, EEA grants Norway): 
10 million  
 
Total  
16.5 million 
 
Translating these estimations for MAES to the context of establishing an EU wide 
methodology, indicators and baselines for ecosystems, a one-off cost of around EUR 7.8 
million can be expected.  
Cost item 
Amount in EUR 
EU staff: 2 FTE for 4 years at EU level 
800 000 
 
MS own financing  
4 million (150 000 per MS)  
EU projects to give overall support and guidance 
3 million  
Total  
7.8 million  
 
Conclusion  
The average of both cost estimates (EUR 5.35 million for MSFD and EUR 7.8 million for 
MAES) leads to the one-off cost estimate of EUR 6.56 million to establish an EU wide 
methodology, indicators and baselines for the 5 afore mentioned ecosystems. 
d) Administration of restoration measures

=== Page 86 (selectable text) ===
204 
The impact assessment estimates the costs of the measures required to meet ecosystem 
restoration targets. In addition to the costs of the restoration works, further costs will be 
incurred by Member State authorities in administering programmes of restoration action.  
Based on data from the Prioritised Action Frameworks (PAFs), we estimate that the costs 
of administration and communications (excluding surveys, planning, and monitoring, 
which are estimated here separately) account for an average of 10 % of the costs of nature 
conservation measures. 
Table VII-3 presents estimates of the annual costs of habitat restoration, maintenance, and 
re-creation measures for five types of HD Annex 1 habitats, based on analysis for this 
impact assessment study. The annual cost of these measures is estimated at EUR 4.4 billion 
over the 9 years 2022-2030, based on the 15 % ecosystem restoration target. Based on 
estimated administration costs at 10 % of the costs of these measures, the costs of 
administering these habitat actions will amount to a further EUR 438 million across the 
EU each year. 
Table VII-3 Estimated costs of administration of restoration measures for Annex 1 habitats (EURO) 
Ecosystem  
Estimated Annual Average 
Costs, 15 % restoration 
target (2022-2030) 
Estimated Annual 
Administration Costs at 
10 % 
Forests 
 2 607 607 200  
 260 760 720  
Grasslands 
 1 220 709 426  
 122 070 943  
Heathlands and scrublands 
 168 896 807  
 16 889 681  
Marshes 
 164 950 693  
 16 495 069  
Peatlands 
 221 050 458  
 22 105 046  
Total 
 4 383 214 584  
 438 321 458  
 
e) Monitoring of restored ecosystems 
Ecosystem restoration needs to be followed by a programme of monitoring, to record 
changes in condition of ecosystems in response to restoration measures. 
We estimate that monitoring will be required for restored and re-created ecosystems on 
average as follows: 
 One visit to all areas 1 year after restoration 
 60 % of restored areas 2 years after restoration  
 30 % of restored areas 3 years after restoration 
 On average, visits to all areas once every 6 years, to coincide with BHD, 
WFD and MSFD reporting, adjusted to risk (e.g. more frequent visits to areas 
that have the potential to change rapidly)  
 
This implies that each restored hectare would be monitored on average 4.3 times over the 
period 2022-2050 (based on a 90 % restoration target by 2050). However, based on current 
practice Member States would only sample 10-15% of area which would provide a 
sufficiently representative sample.

=== Page 87 (selectable text) ===
205 
The EEA Dashboard indicates that a total of between 321 220 km2 and 1 053 736km2 of 
Annex 1 habitats require restoration across the EU, based on the areas known not to be in 
good condition and those in not good or unknown condition, respectively.   
Applying an average monitoring cost of EUR 15/ha (see under survey costs above) on 
15 % of restored area, and a 90 % restoration target by 2050, would give a total monitoring 
cost of between EUR 280 million and EUR 918 million over the period 2022-2050, or an 
average of EUR 10 to 32 million per year (midpoint EUR 21 million per year). 
f) Regulatory reporting 
Member States will be required to report to the Commission progress in implementing 
restoration plans and in restoring the condition of degraded ecosystems. 
It is assumed that reporting will be based on existing data collected under the actions 
identified above, and require inputs averaging 50 -100 days per Member State every 6 
years (similar to requirements under the Habitats Directive; ICF, 2017). 
On this basis, and applying a cost of EUR 317 per person day of work required, costs of 
regulatory reporting would amount to approximately EUR 107 000 per year across the 
EU27. 
Table VII-4 Summary of Costs of Enabling Measures 
 
Estimated Costs 
 
 
One-off costs  
Annual costs 
Surveys of ecosystems  
 
1 099 000 000 
 
Development of national 
restoration plans;  
 
12 800 000 
 
Development of 
methodologies and indicators 
(5 ecosystems) 
6 580 000 
 
Administration of restoration 
measures (2022-2030; 15 % 
target) 
 
 
438 321 000 
Monitoring of restored 
ecosystems 
 
 
20 643 103 
Reporting progress against 
restoration targets 
 
107 000 
Sub-total  
1 118 380 000  
459 071 103 
Costs from 2022 to 2050 
1 118 380 000  
12 853 990 884 
Total costs from 2022 to 2050 
13 972 370 884

=== Page 88 (selectable text) ===
206 
Annex VIII: Background information for potential restoration 
targets 
This Annex includes facts and figures per ecosystem derived from the Member States' 
reporting and assessments under Article 17 of the Habitats Directive (source: EEA).  
Because of its size, it is split and provided in separate files.

=== Page 89 (selectable text) ===
207 
Annex IX: Key relevant findings from the evaluation study on 
the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020 
1. 
THE EU BIODIVERSITY STRATEGY TO 2020  
The EU Biodiversity Strategy to 202054 provided the EU framework for action on 
biodiversity in the 2011-2020 period. It responded to the EU’s global commitments under 
the Convention on Biological Diversity. It set out the following targets, actions and 
horizontal measures: 
Headline target: Halt the loss of biodiversity and the degradation of ecosystem services in the EU 
by 2020, and restore them in so far as feasible, while stepping up the EU contribution to averting 
global biodiversity loss. 
Target 1: Fully implement EU Nature Legislation 
To halt the deterioration in the status of all species and habitats covered by EU nature legislation and 
achieve a significant and measurable improvement in their status so that, by 2020, compared to 
current assessments, 100 % more habitat assessments and 50 % more species assessments under the 
Habitats Directive show an improved conservation status; and 50 % more species assessments under 
the Birds Directive show a secure or improved status.  
Target 2: Maintain and restore ecosystems and their services 
By 2020, ecosystems and their services are maintained and enhanced by establishing green 
infrastructure and restoring at least 15 % of degraded ecosystems 
Target 3: Increase the contribution of agriculture and forestry to biodiversity 
By 2020, maximise areas under agriculture across grasslands, arable land and permanent crops that 
are covered by biodiversity-related measures under the CAP so as to ensure the conservation of 
biodiversity and to bring about a measurable improvement in the conservation status of species and 
habitats that depend on or are affected by agriculture and in the provision of ecosystem services. 
By 2020, Forest Management Plans or equivalent instruments, in line with Sustainable Forest 
Management (SFM), are in place for all forests that are publicly owned and for forest holdings above 
a certain size that receive funding under the EU Rural Development Policy so as to bring about a 
measurable improvement in the conservation status of species and habitats that depend on or are 
affected by forestry and in the provision of related ecosystem services. 
Target 4: Ensure sustainable fisheries and support healthy marine ecosystems 
Achieve Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY) by 2015. Achieve a population age and size distribution 
indicative of a healthy stock, through fisheries management with no significant adverse impacts on 
other stocks, species and ecosystems, in support of achieving Good Environmental Status by 2020, 
as required under the Marine Strategy Framework Directive. 
Target 5: Combat Invasive Alien Species 
Target 6: Help avert global biodiversity loss 
Horizontal measures: Strengthen financing, partnerships and governance  
                                                          
54 Our life insurance, our natural capital: an EU biodiversity strategy to 2020 (COM/2011/244 final).

=== Page 90 (selectable text) ===
208 
2. 
EVALUATION OF THE EU BIODIVERSITY STRATEGY TO 2020  
In March 2022, the Commission published the report of a support study on the evaluation 
of the Strategy implementation55 assessing its effectiveness, efficiency, relevance, 
coherence and EU added value. It concluded that progress towards the headline target has 
been limited, and the target has not been reached. None of the six targets of the Strategy 
have been fully achieved, despite numerous actions being undertaken. Biodiversity, and 
the flow of benefits from healthy ecosystems, has continued to decline in the EU56 and 
globally57. Although many of the Strategy’s actions have been delivered, progress on the 
ground has been too slow and uneven, and its effect limited by continued pressures on 
biodiversity from human activities58. The findings of the evaluation study indicate that, in 
terms of implementation progress59: 
 Progress to the headline target has been limited. There have been positive examples 
of pressures reduction, restoration and sustainable management of ecosystems, that 
demonstrate the feasibility of halting and reversing biodiversity loss. However, their 
scale has been too small to reverse degradation, and the loss of biodiversity and 
ecosystem services has continued in the EU and globally.  
 Progress to Target 1 has been moderate (despite significant progress in 
implementing the actions). Less than half (47 %) of all species assessments under the 
Birds Directive, and only 15 % of habitat assessments under the Habitats Directive 
showed good status in the 2013-2018 reporting period (a decrease compared to the 
2010 biodiversity baseline). The proportion of species assessments under the Habitats 
Directive that show favourable status or improving trends has increased from 17 % to 
27 %. Despite progress in designation, the achievement of favourable conservation 
status has been hindered by management deficiencies such as a lack of adequate 
conservation objectives and measures for many sites, conflicting land management 
objectives, and funding constraints (funding has increased but remains clearly 
insufficient).  
 Progress to Target 2 has been limited (despite significant progress in implementing 
the actions). The initiative on the Mapping and Assessment of Ecosystems and their 
Services (MAES) has helped to build a significant knowledge base on EU ecosystems 
and the services they provide, and the EU Green Infrastructure Strategy (2013) has 
helped to mobilise funding for green infrastructure from EU instruments. The 
Commission has provided guidance to the Member States on developing Restoration 
                                                          
55 Trinomics B.V. (2021) Support to the evaluation of the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020, and follow-up: 
Final study report (Publications Office of the EU, 2022).  
56 European Environment Agency, State of Nature in the EU 2020, European environment — state and 
outlook 2020 (SOER), 2020. 
57 Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services of the Intergovernmental Science-
Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES).  
58 In particular related to land take and use intensification, the over-extraction of biological resources (such 
as timber and fish), pollution (such as pesticides and nutrients), and the increasing impacts of climate 
change and invasive alien species. See EU Ecosystem assessment (JRC 2020). 
59 See SWD/2021/XXX, Section 3.1. Implementation progress.

=== Page 91 (selectable text) ===
209 
Prioritisation Frameworks to advance towards the 15 % restoration target. However, 
only a few Member States have presented such frameworks and restoration progress 
has been slow and uneven. Pressures on ecosystems continue and affect their capacity 
to deliver essential benefits to people. 
 Progress to Target 3 has been limited (despite moderate progress in implementing 
the actions). Biodiversity has continued to decline in agricultural habitats, and to a 
lesser extent in forests. In agroecosystems, these declines have been primarily because 
of two trends: (i) intensification of cultivation techniques on most grasslands and 
croplands, involving high fertiliser and pesticide use, crop specialisation, increases in 
field size and losses of non-farmed habitats and landscape features, on the one hand, 
and (ii) agricultural abandonment (and in some cases, conversion) in semi natural 
habitats, such as semi-natural grasslands. In forest ecosystems, investments in 
improving forest resilience, including biodiversity aspects, were included in more than 
two-thirds of the national Rural Development programmes, however payments for 
biodiversity had a limited uptake. Budgets and uptake have been far below the scale of 
implementation required for Member States to meet their legal obligations under the 
Habitats and Birds Directives. 
 Progress to Target 4 has been limited (despite moderate progress in implementing 
the actions). Thanks to measures under the revised Common Fisheries Policy, several 
commercial fish stocks have shown recovery. However, other stocks have continued 
to be overfished and/or are outside the safe biological limit. Data gaps (on the status 
and trends of marine ecosystems) hinder the design of effective marine biodiversity 
measures. Further pressures from land and sea use, pollution, invasive alien species 
and climate change need to be addressed to achieve Good Environmental Status of 
marine ecosystems.  
 Progress to Target 5 has been limited (despite full implementation of the actions). 
The adoption of the IAS Regulation and the strengthening of the EU plant and animal 
health regimes have been important first steps to combat IAS in the EU. 
Implementation on the ground is still in its early stages and its full impact is yet to be 
realized. Invasive alien species remain a persistent and growing threat across the EU 
ecosystems. 
 Progress to Target 6 has been limited, despite measures to increase financing and 
support for global biodiversity, tackle illegal wildlife trade and some drivers of global 
biodiversity loss related to EU consumption (such as deforestation). Biodiversity and 
ecosystem functions and services are deteriorating worldwide.  
 Horizontal measures (governance, partnerships and financing) have been moderately 
successful: there are many examples of partnership-building activities across the 
targets, with actions focused on information-sharing and collaboration. Significant 
action has been undertaken to integrate biodiversity objectives in the EU policies in the 
2014-2020 budget and to increase the contribution of related funding instruments to 
EU and global biodiversity. However, funding has continued to be a major limitation 
to implementation across all targets. The lack of legally binding provisions, and the

=== Page 92 (selectable text) ===
210 
absence of a dedicated financing instrument have been identified as challenges for 
funding mobilisation. 
The Strategy and its targets were widely recognised by experts and stakeholders as being 
relevant to the EU’s needs with respect to biodiversity, as evidenced by the literature 
review, stakeholder interviews and national case studies. However, stakeholders consulted 
in the course of the evaluation support study have pointed to issues that should have been 
given greater prominence such as climate change; cultural heritage and landscapes; 
more emphasis on the range of ecosystems and the range of pressures on biodiversity 
in each main ecosystem type in the EU. 
The evaluation lessons emerging in the course of the evaluation support study have been 
considered in the development of the EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030, and they will 
inform the design of measures to deliver the 2030 commitments. Findings and lessons of 
pertinence to the impact assessment of binding EU nature restoration targets are presented 
below. 
3. 
KEY FINDINGS OF RELEVANCE TO THE EU NATURE RESTORATION TARGETS 
3.1. Achievements in implementation 
The implementation of the Strategy has been associated with a range of positive 
achievements and impacts60: 
 Examples of successful local protection and restoration, including the restoration of 
degraded vulnerable habitats and the return of emblematic bird and mammal species, 
as well as deployment of nature-based solutions and green infrastructure. While 
projects financed to date often do not have the critical mass to reverse the trends of 
biodiversity loss, they have demonstrated the feasibility of biodiversity protection and 
restoration, as well as the benefits arising from healthy nature. Evidence 
overwhelmingly indicates that the benefits flowing from healthy ecosystems far exceed 
the costs related to their protection, restoration and sustainable management, across all 
biodiversity targets61. 
 The EU Green Infrastructure Strategy62 has encouraged the inclusion of green 
infrastructure measures in various national biodiversity strategies and plans and policy 
documents, such as on the sustainable development of coastal areas, climate change 
adaptation strategies, and EU urban policy63. Increased political momentum and actions 
by cities to create green infrastructure have also been noted in some Member States. 
 The implementation of the Strategy has resulted in significant improvements of the 
knowledge base on ecosystems and their services, via the initiative on the Mapping 
and assessment of ecosystems and their services, with the involvement of national 
                                                          
60 See SWD/2021/XXX, Section 5.1 Effectiveness, 5.1.2. Major achievements and challenges, and 
underlying factors. 
61 See SWD/2021/XXX, Section 5.2 Efficiency, 5.2.1. Cost-effectiveness and socio-economic impacts. 
62 EU Green Infrastructure Strategy (COM/2013/249 final). 
63 Review of progress on the implementation of the EU green infrastructure strategy (COM/2019/236 final).

=== Page 93 (selectable text) ===
211 
authorities and the science and research community in all Member States. The 
methodological framework was applied in the first EU-wide assessment of ecosystems 
and their services published by the Commission at the end of 2020. Member States 
have also developed initiatives to engage stakeholders and citizens in knowledge and 
monitoring work, thus supporting both data collection and awareness raising.  
 
3.2. Failures in implementation 
Despite these successes, the evaluation also identified significant shortcomings. These 
include, in relation to restoration efforts: 
 While there are examples of local restoration success, data on ecosystem restoration 
efforts in the EU is incomplete. The non-binding nature of the Strategy means that 
there are no reporting mechanisms linked to it (beyond those established under existing 
legislation)64.  
 Estimates in studies suggest that restoration activity is significantly below what would 
have been required to reach the target of restoring 15 % of degraded ecosystems: 
between 2 850km2 and 5 700 km2 of habitat restoration is occurring annually in the EU, 
whereas the restoration needs of Annex I habitats alone (i.e. assessments reported in 
′not good′ condition) are estimated at between 167 000 km2 to 263 000 km.  
 The Commission provided guidance (in 2014) and requested the Member States to 
develop Restoration Prioritisation Strategies in order to improve the quality, scale and 
consistency of ecosystem restoration, whilst also defining areas of intervention which 
can be used to target EU funds. However, very few Member States developed and 
submitted such strategies. The absence of Restoration Prioritisation Frameworks 
(RPF) has been a barrier to the strategic planning, financing, implementation and 
monitoring of restoration activities.  
 Challenges to the achievement of the Nature Directives65 related to the availability 
and targeting of funding and other resources, weaknesses in the management of Natura 
2000 sites, and incoherence with other policies and activities.  
 Approaches to implementation and the uptake of biodiversity support measures in 
EU instruments have been uneven across the Member States in the implementation of 
EU policies and related funding instruments.  
 Many direct and indirect pressures and drivers of biodiversity loss have persisted or 
increased, with a significant proportion of these accelerating in recent times.  
 
3.3. Factors of success or failure 
The evaluation identified a range of factors that have enabled or hindered progress, 
including: 
                                                          
64 See SWD/2021/XXX, Section 5.1 Effectiveness, 5.1.2. Major achievements and challenges, and 
underlying factors. 
65 Fitness Check of the EU Nature Directives.

=== Page 94 (selectable text) ===
212 
 Policy integration. Mainstreaming and prioritizing biodiversity objectives in other EU 
policies is essential, considering the complex interactions between biodiversity, the 
provision of ecosystem services, the impacts of land, water and sea use and 
management and the potential of nature-based solutions to contribute to wider 
environmental and socio-economic objectives. While policy integration increased 
under the Strategy, it has remained insufficient. Biodiversity targets of voluntary 
nature were not systematically prioritised for funding in the design and 
implementation of EU instruments in other policy areas, and measures of low or no 
positive biodiversity impact were often favoured in national programming. 
 Understanding of win-win approaches between biodiversity protection and 
restoration, on the one hand, and wider environmental and socio-economic objectives 
on the other. Such understanding could increase the deployment of nature-based 
solutions for biodiversity and climate adaptation, carbon sequestration and storage, 
disaster prevention and other benefits from healthy ecosystems. Biodiversity loss and 
climate change are closely linked, yet the potential for synergies between improving 
ecosystem resilience and nature based solutions, on the one hand, and climate 
mitigation and adaptation, on the other, has not been sufficiently used. In addition, 
awareness and understanding of natural capital and nature-related financial risk is 
needed to encourage greater private sector engagement in efforts to protect and restore 
biodiversity and ensure its sustainable management.  
 Resources for implementation. Funding for biodiversity has increased since 2010 but 
remains clearly insufficient. Insufficient funding was commonly cited as a key barrier 
to restoration. The Strategy did not specify the biodiversity financing needs and set no 
target, which was a major setback in securing the needed resources.  
 
Box 1. Cost-effectiveness of biodiversity protection and restoration 
Despite significant variations of magnitude in estimates, evidence overwhelmingly 
indicates that the benefits flowing from healthy ecosystems far exceed the costs related 
to their protection, restoration and sustainable management, across all biodiversity 
targets.  
The actual costs of Target 2 implementation activities in 2016 were estimated at between 
€4.8 million and €33.1 million (highly uncertain). The one-off cost of restoring 15 % of 
degraded ecosystems has been estimated at around €9.6 billion, and the additional cost 
of maintaining all restored ecosystems in good condition was estimated at €618 to 
€1 660 million per year. Restoration activity has been significantly below what would 
be required to fulfil Target 2, and the realised total expenditure during the 2010-2020 
period is significantly lower.  
The total benefits of implementation across the EU cannot be estimated or monetised 
due to lack of systematically collated evidence on the restoration undertaken. Economic 
activity associated with ecosystem restoration has been estimated to be between €11.5 
and €79.5 million. Restoration and the deployment of green infrastructure contribute to 
a range of socio-economic benefits linked to improved air and water quality, flood 
control, noise reduction, recreation and social opportunities, pollination, soil fertility and

=== Page 95 (selectable text) ===
213 
health. The restoration of forest, wetlands and other ecosystems has brought millions of 
euros in savings across the EU due to lower water retention and purification costs66, 67. 
National parks can generate substantial employment both directly and indirectly in the 
broader region68. Urban green infrastructure can generate benefits in the form of 
enhanced health and well-being69. According to some estimates, 110 000 direct FTE 
jobs each year can be supported by investment needed to achieve Target 2 (15 % 
restoration)70. However, very little of the required investment and restoration effort has 
materialised, and thus most of these benefits and jobs were not created. 
EU and international studies have shown that investments in marine biodiversity can 
generate high economic returns in enhanced yields, higher quality fish products, and 
tourism. Funding allocated to measures for the protection and restoration of marine 
biodiversity under the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund has been estimated at 
around €199 million in 2015, €134 million in 2016, €136 million in 2017, €90 million 
in 2018 and €128 million in 2019. The benefits provided by healthy fish stocks and 
oceans are immeasurable.  
The Strategy has not fully achieved any of its Targets. This means that not only the full 
benefits provided by the Strategy’s targets and actions have not materialised, but also 
natural capital and ecosystem services are further deteriorating. Other socio-economic 
impacts, such as health impacts, social vulnerability, and safety, can also emerge due to 
the failure to protect biodiversity and ecosystems. Human induced biodiversity loss also 
undermines efforts to mitigate climate change and adapt to its inevitable impacts. 
 The choice of policy instrument. The voluntary nature of the Strategy has been 
commonly cited by environmental organisations as a key reason for limited action and 
progress on the biodiversity agenda throughout Europe, particularly in relation to the 
low response in developing Restoration Prioritisation Frameworks, and restoration 
efforts lagging far behind the 15 % ambition set in Target 2.  
 
Box 2: The nature of the Strategy as an instrument 
 
The EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020 had an important role in providing a coherent, 
strategic EU level framework, giving rise to political commitment, setting common 
targets, actions and mechanisms for their coordinated implementation and progress 
tracking, and providing links with other relevant EU policies and legislation. At the 
same time, the Strategy constituted a largely voluntary framework within which a 
range of instruments, from voluntary to binding ones, needed to work together to 
                                                          
66 EEA Report No 6/2016 European forest ecosystems. State and trends. 
67 Siuta and Nedelciu, Report on Socio-Economic Benefits of Wetland Restoration in Central and Eastern 
Europe, a publication by CEEweb for Biodiversity, 2016, Budapest, Hungary. 
68 Nunes et al., The Social Dimension of Biodiversity Policy: Final Report, 2011. 
69 European Environment Agency Report No 21/2019 Healthy environment, healthy lives: how the 
environment influences health and well-being in Europe. 
70 ICF et al., The EU biodiversity objectives and the labour market: benefits and identification of skill gaps 
in the current workforce, 2012.

=== Page 96 (selectable text) ===
214 
ensure delivery. The evaluation examined whether alternative policy tools would 
have had the potential to better deliver the targets in a cost-effective manner than a 
strategy. Implementation experience has helped to identify areas within this wider 
strategic framework, within which: 
 
- 
voluntary mechanisms and incentives worked well based on the motivation of 
stakeholders to engage in biodiversity efforts, such as cooperation of front-running 
businesses in the EU Business@Biodiversity Platform, or the development of green 
infrastructure in EU regions and cities that had already set for themselves ambitious 
biodiversity objectives.  
 
- 
voluntary instruments worked well in support of the implementation and 
enforcement of EU legislation in the Member States, such as the provision of 
Commission guidance on Natura 2000 for different sectors, or the biogeographical 
cooperation process helping to implement the EU Nature Directives. 
 
- 
reliance on voluntary instruments alone was not sufficient to ensure delivery, in 
particular when urgent, strategic and large scale action was needed. This was the 
case of one of the flagship targets to reverse biodiversity loss: Target 2 to restore at 
least 15 % of degraded ecosystems in the EU, which also reflected the global Aichi 
Target and the EU’s commitment under the Convention on Biological Diversity.  
 
Legislative and regulatory instruments are the main tool for environmental policy 
and have been widely used at EU level. According to SOER 2020 , there are 
significantly fewer binding targets for biodiversity than for other environment areas, 
such as climate change, air pollution, waste, and chemicals. When biodiversity policy 
objectives and targets are not met (as has been the case for several consecutive 
biodiversity policy instruments), there is a tendency to reiterate them and extend the 
timeframe for their achievement. SOER 2020 points to six key areas for bold action, 
one of which is the development of systemic policy frameworks with binding targets 
to mobilise and guide actions across actors and levels.  
 
It was a clear conclusion of the evaluation, and a view held by a high number of 
stakeholders consulted that, while voluntary instruments could play an important role 
in certain contexts, the lack of legislative teeth was a significant factor in the 
Strategy’s failures in effectiveness and cost-effectiveness. For the operationalisation 
of the biodiversity targets, the Strategy could have benefited from a different 
combination of regulatory and market-based instruments. The EP Resolution of 
January 2020 called upon the Commission to “move away from voluntary 
commitments and to propose an ambitious and inclusive Strategy that sets legally 
(and, consequently, enforceable) binding targets for the EU and its Member States". 
 
  
 Clearly formulated, measurable targets. Many of the Strategy’s targets and actions 
were not measurable or specific enough to guide implementation and enable the

=== Page 97 (selectable text) ===
215 
monitoring of results. For example, challenges to restoration have arisen from the 
ambiguity of the 15 % restoration target71: the ecosystems it referred to72, how to 
measure the achievement of the objective73, unclarity of what restoration activities 
comprise, and the absence of baseline information to define what ‘degraded’ 
ecosystems are. 
 Knowledge (including cooperation and dialogue between policy-makers and science 
and research stakeholders) is essential for evidence-based decision-making, robust 
policy development, implementation and monitoring. Gaps in data and monitoring 
(including on pressures and their impacts on biodiversity) or lack of transparency and 
access to data have hindered progress in the implementation of the Strategy. At the 
same time, knowledge needs have been recognized and the Strategy has supported the 
development and application of common methodologies for the mapping and 
assessment of ecosystems and their services, and and approaches to reflect the value of 
biodiversity in decision-making74. 
 Clear responsibilities for implementation, co-ordination and cooperation between 
relevant stakeholders. Most stakeholders consulted in the course of the evaluation 
considered that the Strategy had either ‘partially’ or ‘poorly’ engaged stakeholders in 
implementation, in particular at national/regional levels. Stakeholders noted that the 
governance of the Strategy had contributed significantly to access to information on 
the state of biodiversity, yet it has not achieved cooperation and coordinated action 
across policy areas. Private sector engagement has been regarded as a significant 
untapped potential to reduce pressures on biodiversity from business activities. 
 Last but not least, political priority given to biodiversity protection and restoration, 
especially vis-à-vis other policy objectives, is essential for successful implementation. 
 
4. KEY LESSONS AND THEIR RELEVANCE TO THE NATURE RESTORATION INITIATIVE 
1. Effective implementation requires specific, measurable targets with clear 
definitions, timelines and responsibilities for implementation. 
In relation to nature restoration, the proposed EU Nature Restoration Law will set out 
concrete definitions, targets, timelines and responsibility for implementation. 
2. Well-designed biodiversity protection, restoration and sustainable use measures 
can bring wider environmental and socio-economic benefits 
The proposed EU Nature Restoration Law puts a strong emphasis on biodiversity as well 
as socio-economic benefits for restoration, in particular support to climate mitigation and 
                                                          
71 European Habitats Forum Detailed Response to the EU Biodiversity Strategy, 2011. 
72 Tucker et al., Estimation of the financing needs to implement Target 2 of the EU Biodiversity Strategy, 
Report to the European Commission, Institute for European Environmental Policy, 2013. 
73 European Court of Auditors, Special Report no 13/2020 Biodiversity on farmland: CAP contribution has 
not halted the decline.  
74 Guidance on the integration of ecosystems and their services in decision-making.

=== Page 98 (selectable text) ===
216 
adaptation, disaster risk reduction and the provision of a range of further ecosystem 
services.  
3. Actions to halt and reverse biodiversity loss needs to cover the range of pressures 
on all main ecosystem types 
The impact assessment for the EU Nature Restoration Law has carefully considered the 
range of main EU ecosystem types and the feasibility of setting targets that tackle both 
pressures (passive restoration) and active measures to restore degraded ecosystems. Where 
sufficient evidence was available, concrete targets have been proposed. Where further 
research is needed, the legislation includes provisions for strengthened monitoring to 
collect the evidence needed. 
4. A mixture of policy instruments is needed to deliver the biodiversity commitments 
The approach to an overarching strategic framework for coherent biodiversity action has 
been retained in the EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030. At the same time, a range of policy 
instruments are envisaged to deliver its commitments, from a new Nature Restoration Law 
through to strengthened financing and partnerships. 
5. A substantial increase of funding is necessary, with a robust tracking system 
The EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030 indicates the scale of funding that needs to be made 
available for the implementation of the Strategy and sets out measures to meet the 
implementation funding needs. This is matched by an increased funding ambition for 
biodiversity in the EU budget for the 2021-2027 period. Legal restoration targets are 
expected to both strengthen the mainstreaming of measures in support of restoration in EU 
instruments, and the uptake of such measures at the national level. 
6. EU programmes and instruments should be biodiversity-proof to ensure no harm 
Nature restoration targets and the need to ensure the sustainability of restored ecosystems 
will be taken into account in the biodiversity proofing of EU programmes and instruments. 
7. A robust biodiversity governance framework is needed to ensure evidence-based 
policy-making, stakeholder engagement, responsibility for implementation, and 
robust and transparent monitoring and review mechanisms 
The Commission put in place, in 2022, an enhanced governance and monitoring framework 
for the EU Biodiversity Strategty for 2030. 
Lesson 8. Knowledge, awareness, capacities and skills are crucial to support action 
on biodiversity across all parts of society, sectors and levels 
In synergy with other EU instruments, the Nature Restoration Law will encourage actions 
in the Member States to strengthen knowledge, awareness and skills for restoration.  
Lesson 9. Biodiversity loss and climate change are inter-linked and need to be tackled 
together 
The proposed Nature Restoration Law builds on the strong synergies between restoring 
healthy ecosystems and the benefits they provide for climate mitigation and adaptation.

=== Page 99 (selectable text) ===
Annex X: Coherence with EU legislation and policy initiatives 
related to nature restoration; approach to non-deterioration 
This annex includes:  
1. Synergies and added value of the Nature Restoration Law with respect to BHD, 
WFD, MSFD and climate regulation.  
2. An overview (table) of policy initiatives and laws that are existing and currently in 
preparation as well as how they (could) relate to the setting of legally binding 
restoration targets.  
3. The approach to ensure non-deterioration of ecosystems that are in good condition 
and of those that still need to be restored. 
 
1. Synergies and added value of the Nature Restoration Law with 
respect to BHD, WFD, MSFD and climate legislation.  
Birds and Habitats Directives (BHD):  
Based on the arguments presented below, the added value of the new legislation on 
restoration will be: 
1) to set a clear deadline for achieving good status for species and habitats of EU 
conservation concern (all birds, habitats and species listed in the Habitats 
Directive’s annexes); 
2) to create explicit restoration obligations for species and habitats of EU 
conservation concern outside the Natura 2000 network; 
3) to give a real impetus to restoration in Natura 2000 as well as in other protected 
areas (30 % voluntary conservation improvement target for both terrestrial and 
marine set out in EU Biodiversity Strategy); 
4) put in place a strategic restoration planning by Member States up to 2050, thereby 
creating a mechanism to achieve good status which would address in a coherent 
way the restoration needs under the Habitats, Birds, Water Framework and Marine 
Strategy Framework Directives; 
5) to set restoration targets for ecosystems not explicitly / comprehensively covered 
by existing legislation, such as soil, pollinators, urban; 
6) to create strong links with the climate mitigation and adaptation agenda by 
requiring Member States to prioritize the most climate relevant restoration, i.e. 
creating a win-win situation. 
The Birds Directive aims to protect all wild bird species and their habitats across the EU.

=== Page 100 (selectable text) ===
218 
It requires restoration of bird populations to favourable conservation status (FCS)75 for all 
460 species of naturally occurring birds in the wild state in the European territory of the 
Member States to which the Treaty applies.  
However, the Directives’ specific provision on restoration mainly relate to the habitats of 
bird species for which Member States have to classify, protect and conserve Special 
Protection Areas (part of the Natura 2000 network), which cover 197 species and sub-
species listed in Annex I of the directive as well as regularly occurring migratory species 
not listed in Annex I. Outside Natura 2000, while there is a more general duty under Article 
3 of the Directive to maintain or re-establish a sufficient diversity and area of habitats for 
all 460 species of birds, these provisions are more general and harder to 
implement/enforce. 
The Habitats Directive covers 1200 threatened or endemic species of wild animals and 
plants, collectively referred to as species of Community interest (listed in its Annexes II, 
IV and V), as well as 233 rare habitat types, listed in its Annex I.  
The Habitats Directive requires restoration to FCS for all habitat types and species of 
Community interest. However, its specific provisions on restoration relate to Annex I 
habitats as well as habitats of the species listed in Annex II within Special Areas of 
Conservation (part of the Natura 2000 network). Outside Natura 2000, there is no specific 
provision on restoration for habitat and species of Community interest, albeit the 
achievement of the directive’s objective would require restoration to happen.  
The Natura 2000 network on land currently covers 18 % of the EU surface, ranging from 
8,3 % in Denmark to 36,7 % in Croatia, which reflects differences in biodiversity richness 
but also different designation strategies by the MS. The network covers approximately 
34 % of the surface of all Annex I habitat types, which means that about two thirds lies 
outside.  
Therefore, it can be concluded that – as regards the Habitats and Birds directives - the areas 
for which there is no specific provision on restoration cover all land and sea that do not 
fall within Natura 2000 sites, i.e. the majority of the EU territory, large parts of which are 
undergoing continuous degradation (EU Ecosystem Assessment 2020). 
Moreover, since the Birds and Habitats Directive do not specify a deadline by which FCS 
shall be reached, the pace of implementation of measures towards this goal has been very 
slow; action has been concentrated in setting up Natura 2000 sites and to date it has been 
mainly linked to protection of the habitats and species in the sites, rather than to their 
restoration.  
                                                          
75 The Environmental Liability Directive (Directive 2004/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 21 April 2004 on environmental liability with regard to the prevention and remedying of 
environmental damage) has de facto equated the Birds Directive objective to the one of the Habitats 
Directive, as it applies the concept of favourable conservation status (FCS) to birds, too.

=== Page 101 (selectable text) ===
219 
Although protection and restoration of habitats (e.g. peatlands) under the Birds and the 
Habitats Directive will benefit soil health and soil biodiversity, this is not an explicit 
objective of the Directives. Furthermore, although some pollinators are protected under the 
Habitats Directive (e.g. rare butterfly species) and they also benefit from habitat 
conservation measures (e.g. for grasslands) they are not a particular focus of the Nature 
Directives. Finally, there is no EU legislation requiring the restoration of urban 
ecosystems. 
Water Framework Directive (WFD) and Marine Strategy Directive (MSFD) 
The Nature Restoration Law proposal and in particular the freshwater and a marine targets 
will  
- 
Support an acceleration of the implementation of both the MFSD and the WFD;  
- 
Can cover topics which go beyond the direct scope of application of both the 
MFSD (fine grained detail for several marine habitats) and the WFD (free flowing 
rivers, connectivity with riverine habitats, and small water bodies);  
- 
Support efforts to secure a more frequent and regular monitoring of the actual 
state of biodiversity, in line with the more frequent and regular monitoring 
promoted under the 8th EAP and, more recently, under the Zero Pollution Action 
Plan too.  
 
The fact that MS would have to set out National Restoration Plans on how to reach the 
above targets, further requirements to address key pressures on both marine and freshwater 
ecosystems can be introduced. These can accelerate the implementation of both the MFSD 
and the WFD – paving the way for a more ambitious approach to both MFSD and WFD 
targets, notably beyond the, respectively, 2020 and 2027 legal deadlines for achieving good 
status for all seas, rivers and lakes, transitional and coastal water bodies. 
Marine environment:  
In the future in particular for marine species, the legal proposal can pave the ground for a 
much more granular monitoring of data on all these species, allowing to set targets for 
species in a second step, as soon as Member States will have collected sufficient data. In 
this context, synergies will be sought with the upcoming “Action plan to conserve fisheries 
and conserve marine ecosystems”, which builds on the Technical Measures report adopted 
last September and which will, among a variety of actions, focus on certain individual 
species. Habitats (for example seagrass beds) harbour an abundant variety of species. 
Protecting habitats therefore has the added value of restoring both ecosystems as well as 
those (non-resident) species that rely on these habitats. Habitats are more easily monitored 
and progress can be registered over a short-medium period of time. Focusing on restoring 
them as a first step makes sense.

=== Page 102 (selectable text) ===
220 
Also in the future there is a possibility to turn the indicators used to achieve the marine 
targets into indicators to achieve Good Environmental Status under the MFSD. Progress 
towards achieving the restoration targets could thus feed into progress under the MSFD.  
 
There are also synergies in terms of better cross-linking the reporting on restoration efforts 
(hence better integrate the policy objectives) under the MSFD, WFD and HD to be able to 
tell a comprehensive story of marine environmental protection. 
 
Freshwater environment 
The targets proposed for “Rivers, lakes and riverine/alluvial habitats” would stimulate 
synergistic for the WFD. In particular, the restoration target in the form of a requirement 
to map and, where possible, remove obsolete barriers, as an opportunity to:  
- 
 accelerate the implementation of the WFD; 
- 
 help to maintain good status / non deterioration after 2027.  
Achieving WFD objectives will in itself contribute to the 2030 BD target (considering that 
20 out of 32 Annex I Habitats Directive categorised as “rivers, lakes and alluvial habitats” 
are rivers and lakes), and will contribute to the 2050 BD target by enabling a prioritisation 
of barriers to be removed. The prioritisation will build upon the systematic approach taken 
under the WFD, enabling to identify  
1) barriers justified under Art 4(3) WFD;  
2) barriers in natural river water bodies and measures required to achieve good status 
(possibly but not necessarily taking down barriers) and  
3) barriers whose removal can be carried out in the most cost effective manner, to achieve 
high status/free flowing rivers and create floodplains to the benefit of ecosystems outside, 
yet directly dependent on, water bodies. 
Similarly, the requirement to map out smaller water units, which may not be part of the 
WFD delineated water bodies, to verify how severely they have been impacted, the primary 
pressures and the current conditions they are in, can help pave the way towards setting 
specific restoration targets in a second stage, and ultimately could play a critical role in 
meeting the EU restoration policy objectives by 2050, by closing existing data gaps of 
unmapped and unknown habitats and conditions.  
Climate Legislation 
Enabling effective implementation will also be supported by establishing effective 
synergies with climate legislation.  
A specific opportunity is the review of the Regulation on land use, land-use change and 
forestry (LULUCF). This work would develop monitoring requirements on LULUCF 
emissions and removals, particular from high carbon stock land, land under protection or 
restoration provisions, and land with high climate risk, and explicitly link to the land 
definitions in environmental legislation. This would in the longer term enable cross 
referencing between land-based climate change mitigation, and adaptation, disaster risk

=== Page 103 (selectable text) ===
221 
reduction and ecological condition. This would lead to better cross correspondence 
between climate law and the restoration law in the longer term.  
A related opportunity is the forthcoming mandatory requirement to ensure progress in 
adaptation to climate change under Article 4 of the EU Climate Law, to adopt and 
implement national adaptation strategies and plans, and to promote nature-based solutions 
and ecosystem-based adaptation.

=== Page 104 (selectable text) ===
2. Overview of links and synergies with EU legislation and policy initiatives 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
EU Directives, Regulations and Decisions 
Birds and 
Habitats 
Directives76  
Existing  
 
HD Article 2(2) requires that measures taken pursuant to the 
HD shall be designed to maintain or restore, at favourable 
conservation status, natural habitats and species of wild fauna 
and flora of Community interest (habitats listed in Annex I and 
species listed in Annex II and/or IV or V). However, it does not 
set a deadline or timeframe for achieving this objective.  
 
According to HD Article 3, Natura 2000 shall enable the 
natural habitat types and the species' habitats concerned to be 
maintained or, where appropriate, restored at a favorable 
conservation status in their natural range. 
 
HD Article 10 furthermore states that MS shall in their land-
use planning and development policies encourage the 
management of landscape features with the aim of improving 
connectivity within the N2000 network.  
 
HD Article 6 is the key provision governing the protection and 
the management of Special areas of conservation. In particular: 
o 
HD Article 6(1) states for special areas of conservation, MS 
shall establish the necessary conservation measures 
involving, if need be, appropriate management plans 
specifically designed for the sites or integrated into other 
development 
plans, 
and 
appropriate 
statutory, 
administrative or contractual measures which correspond to 
the ecological requirements of the natural habitat types in 
Annex I and the species in Annex II present on the sites.  
o 
HD article 6(2) states that MS shall take appropriate steps 
to avoid, in the special areas of conservation, the 
deterioration of natural habitats and the habitats of species 
as well as disturbance of the species for which the areas 
 
Definition of good ecosystem status under NRL has to be aligned 
with favourable conservation status (FCS) under BHD. 
 
NRL will support delivering the voluntary target in the BS2030 that 
habitats and species show no deterioration in conservation trends 
and status and at least 30 % reach favourable conservation status or 
at least show a positive trend. 
 
Restored ecosystems outside Natura 2000 under NRL could be 
designated as (strictly) protected areas thus contributing to the 
relevant BDS2030 targets. 
 
The NRL will complement the BHD by: (1) setting a deadline for 
achieving FCS for birds, Annex I habitats and species listed in 
Annex II and/or IV or V, which is missing in both the Birds and 
Habitats Directives; (2) creating more explicit restoration 
obligations for Annex I habitats and habitats of birds and species 
listed in Annex II and/or IV or V outside of the Natura 2000 
network; (3) putting in place the mechanism to achieve FCS, e.g. 
by requiring MS to prepare restoration plans; and (4) creating links 
with the climate change policy, e.g. by requiring Member States to 
restore carbon and nature rich habitats. 
                                                          
76 Birds Directive: EUR-Lex - 32009L0147 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu), Habitats Directive: EUR-Lex - 01992L0043-20130701 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)

=== Page 105 (selectable text) ===
223 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
have been designated, in so far as such disturbance could 
be significant in relation to the objectives of this Directive.  
 
The BD requires restoration to FCS for all species of naturally 
occurring birds in the wild state in the European territory of the 
Member States to which the Treaty applies. This shall be 
achieved by means of protection, management and restoration 
of species and their habitats across the territory of the Member 
States, as well as in Special Protection Areas (SPA) for certain 
bird species.  
 
By virtue of article 7 of the HD, obligations arising under 
Article 6 (2) (and (3) and (4)) of the HD also apply to SPA 
classified under the BD. 
Water 
Framework 
Directive 
(WFD)77 
Existing 
 
Establishes a framework for the protection of inland surface 
waters (including rivers, lakes, transitional waters, coastal 
waters) 
and 
groundwater 
which i.a. prevents 
further 
deterioration and protects and enhances the status of aquatic 
ecosystems.  
 
The NRL definition of good ecosystem condition does not 
duplicate, nor substitute the 2027 target of good status for all water 
bodies under WFD; it rather complements it. 
 
In line with the BDS2030, the NRL targets on freshwater 
ecosystems reinforce and work in synergy with the targets of the 
WFD (achieve good ecological status for all water bodies by 2027) 
 
NRL targets contribute to accelerate the implementation of WFD 
and reinforce the synergies between WFD and the nature 
legislation.  
 
NRL requirement on non-deterioration would match the existing 
WFD requirement to take measures to prevent deterioration of the 
status of all bodies of water 
Marine Strategy 
Framework 
Directive 
(MSFD)78 
Existing 
 
Establishes a framework within which Member States shall 
take the necessary measures to reach the target of achieving or 
maintaining good environmental status in the marine 
environment by the year 2020 at the latest. 
 
Definition of good ecosystem status under NRL aligned with good 
environmental status under MSFD. 
 
The MSFD implementation of Art.13 (and the ongoing MSFD 
review) may consider the NRL targets as measures to achieve good 
environmental status. 
                                                          
77 Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy  EUR-Lex - 
32000L0060 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu) 
78 Directive 2008/56/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008 establishing a framework for community action in the field of marine environmental policy 
EUR-Lex - 32008L0056 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)

=== Page 106 (selectable text) ===
224 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
 
Requires MS to develop marine strategies that protect and 
preserve the marine environment, prevent its deterioration or, 
where practicable, restore marine ecosystems in areas where 
they have been adversely affected. 
 
NRL targets reinforce existing MSFD targets (and do not create a 
derogation from the deadline/ambition). 
 
NRL targets focus on the maintenance of ecological functions at a 
higher resolution than the normal management/reporting scales 
under the MSFD, ensuring consistency and synergy of the policy 
objectives. 
Marine Spatial 
Planning 
Directive 
(MSPD)79 
Existing 
 
Requires MS to consider i.a. environmental aspects to support 
sustainable development and growth in the maritime sector, 
applying an ecosystem-based approach.  
 
Requires MS to set up marine spatial plans that consider 
interactions of activities and uses and contribute to i.a. the 
preservation, protection and improvement of the environment, 
including resilience to climate change impacts.  
 
NRL could provide concrete objectives and measures to apply the 
ecosystem-based approach enshrined in the MSPD 
 
The links between NRL and marine protected areas could provide 
more certainty and usefulness to the spatial plans 
Floods Directive 
(FD)80 
Existing 
 
Establishes a framework for the assessment and management 
of flood risks, aiming at the reduction of the adverse 
consequences for i.a. the environment. 
 
NRL reinforces FD because the restoration of the ability of marine 
and freshwater ecosystems to provide regulating services, such as 
natural water retention, could help prevent and mitigate the effects 
of floods (climate adaptation).  
 
Also, healthy ecosystems are more resilient to the effects of severe 
floods. 
Climate Law  
Existing 
(Regulation 
2021/1119 of 30 
June 2021). 
 
Establishes a framework for the irreversible and gradual 
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and enhancement of 
removals by natural or other sinks in the Union. 
 
Sets a legally binding target of net zero greenhouse gas 
emissions (climate neutrality) by 2050 and negative emissions 
thereafter. 
 
Introduces a new EU target for 2030 of reducing net 
greenhouse gas emissions by at least 55 %, compared to 1990. 
This includes the review and possible revision of climate and 
 
NRL, by focusing on restoring ecosystems with a high potential for 
climate adaptation/mitigation (e.g. through carbon removals), will 
contribute to achieving Climate Law targets.  
 
The Climate Law contributes to the NRL by strengthening EU 
policies on climate change (both mitigation and adaptation), which 
is a major pressure on biodiversity loss.  
 
The Climate Law acknowledges the role of ecosystem restoration 
in maintaining, managing and enhancing natural sinks and 
promoting biodiversity (consideral 23).  
                                                          
79 Directive 2014/89/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 2014 establishing a framework for maritime spatial planning EUR-Lex - 32014L0089 - EN - EUR-
Lex (europa.eu) 
80 Directive 2007/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2007 on the assessment and management of flood risks EUR-Lex - 32007L0060 - EN - EUR-Lex 
(europa.eu)

=== Page 107 (selectable text) ===
225 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
energy laws to be able to achieve this updated target (fit for 55 
package). 
 
Requires MS to develop and implement adaptation strategies 
to strengthen resilience and reduce vulnerability to the effects 
of climate change. 
 
Strengthens existing provisions on adaptation to climate 
change.  
 
Establishes a framework for achieving progress in pursuit of 
adaptation goals, in a consistent manner in all policy areas, 
including biodiversity (in particular nature-based solutions). 
 
Under the Climate Law, Member States shall promote nature-based 
solutions and ecosystem-based adaptation. 
Climate 
Governance 
Regulation81  
Existing 
 
Specifies common rules on the planning, monitoring and the 
reporting of climate action, in particular emissions and 
removals associated to land use, land-use changes and forestry.  
 
The review of the LULUCF Regulation proposes to introduce high-
level monitoring provisions for land with high carbon stock, land 
under restoration, land under protection and land with high climate 
risk.  
 
The NRL would allow to amend this list, when restoration targets 
will be clarified. 
Environmental 
Impact 
Assessment 
Directive 
(EIAD)82 
Existing 
 
Requires ‘developers’ to 
do 
an 
environmental 
impact 
assessment for a wide range of defined public and private 
projects, and covers impacts on biodiversity, with particular 
attention to species and habitats protected under BHD.  
 
The 
potential NRL requirements 
for 
non-deterioration 
and to identify, describe, assess and disclose the impacts of (new) 
sectoral policies likely to exacerbate ecosystem degradation 
processes, could be aligned with the EIA Directive. 
 
NRL could say that assessment of project-level impacts needs to be 
done according to the EIAD where this could apply, including for 
interests that go beyond the species/ habitat protected under the 
BHD.  
Strategic 
Environmental 
Assessment 
Existing 
 
Examines the likely environmental impacts of certain plans or 
programmes in order to take them into account in the decision-
making process, with the aim of achieving a high-
 
The potential NRL requirements 
for 
non-deterioration 
and to identify, 
describe, assess and 
disclose the 
impacts 
of (new) sectoral 
policies 
likely 
to 
exacerbate 
ecosystem 
degradation processes, could be aligned with the SEAD. 
                                                          
81 Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action EUR-Lex - 
32018R1999 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu) 
82 Directive 2011/92/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2011 on the assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment 
EUR-Lex - 32011L0092 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)

=== Page 108 (selectable text) ===
226 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
Directive 
(SEAD)83 
level protection of the environment and to promote sustainable 
development.  
Restoration plans under the NRL themselves would also require 
SEAD.  
Eel Regulation 
No 1100/200784 
Existing 
 
Sets a framework for the recovery of the European Eel.  
 
NRL will greatly help in the restoration of eel habitats (in particular 
in river and coastal areas) and ultimately in the recovery of eels. 
Common 
Fisheries Policy 
(CFP)85 
Existing 
 
Lays out rules and guidance on the conservation, management 
and sustainable exploitation of living aquatic resources. 
 
The CFP provides a framework for the conservation of marine 
biological resources and the management of fisheries and fleets 
exploiting those resources; it aims to ensure that fishing and 
aquaculture activities are environmentally sustainable in the 
long-term and consistent with achieving socio-economic 
benefits. 
 
NRL marine targets could contribute to achieve sustainable fishing. 
Common 
Agricultural 
Policy (CAP) 
Existing (renewal 
being negotiated) 
 
To reach the MFF/NextGen target to spend 30 % on climate 
objectives, 40 % of CAP spending must be dedicated towards 
these objectives. If CAP budget will be spent on e.g. carbon 
removals, this would contribute to achieving the NRL targets. 
 
Possible NRL targets on agroecosystems may also be addressed by 
the CAP, e.g. in terms of crop diversity, nutrient balance, fertiliser 
use, pesticide use and risk reduction. Depending on the target some 
indicators might be available under CAP monitoring.  
 
NRP might 
introduce additional targets/indicators on 
agroecosystems that supplement requirements in the coming 
CAP to further improve the balance between farming and 
nature. For such cases, CAP might not provide the framework for 
monitoring and evaluation. 
Environmental 
Accounts 
Regulation 
(EAR) 
Incoming 
 
Proposes a new ecosystem accounting module providing legal 
definitions of ecosystem extent, ecosystem condition, 
conversion and ecosystem services, as well regular reporting 
on these by MS. 
 
Definitions under EAR and NRL are streamlined where beneficial. 
                                                          
83 Assessment of the certain effects of plans and programmes on the environment Directive 2001/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the C... - EUR-Lex (europa.eu) 
84 Council Regulation (EC) No 1100/2007 of 18 September 2007 establishing measures for the recovery of the stock of European eel EUR-Lex - 32007R1100 - EN - EUR-Lex 
(europa.eu) 
85 Common fisheries policy (CFP) (europa.eu)

=== Page 109 (selectable text) ===
227 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
Environmental 
Liability 
Directive 
(ELD)86 
 
 
Existing  
 
Establishes a 
framework 
of 
environmental 
liability, i.a. to prevent 
and/or 
remedy 
environmental 
damage to water, protected species and natural habitats (both 
within and outside N2000 under certain circumstances, as 
confirmed 
by 
the 
Commission 
Guidelines/Notice 
on 
environmental damage in paragraph 90) through restoration of 
the 
environment 
to 
its baseline condition - in 
case 
of 
strict/fault-based liability.  
 
The potential NRL requirements might contribute to knowledge 
of baseline conditions through monitoring, and knowledge of 
remediation techniques through methodological provisions on 
restoration.  
 
ELD establishes a precedent of legally binding prevention and 
restoration obligations outside N2000.  
 
“Environmental damage” under ELD includes not only damage to 
Annex I habitats themselves but impairments of the “natural 
resource services” that they provide. As paragraph 42 of the Notice 
notes, these can include carbon services and flood protection.   
LULUCF 
Regulation 2021-
2030 
Existing 
(Regulation 
2018/841) 
Establishes a non-debit rule at MS level,  
Require that all land categories contribute to the reduction of 
emissions and the enhancement of removals. 
 
MS forest reference levels should be consistent with the 
objective of contributing to the conservation of biodiversity. 
MS have published national forest accounting plans, which, among 
other, explains how forest reference levels are consistency with 
biodiversity conservation objective. 
 LULUCF 
Regulation 2021-
2030 (525/2013) 
proposal 
 
Existing COM 
(2021) 554 final 
 
Strengthen LULUCF objectives at EU and MS level. 
 
Compliance reports shall include an assessment of synergies 
between mitigation and biodiversity.   
 
Maps and monitors certain habitats relevant for restoration.  
 
Potential co-benefits for restoration in terms of carbon sinks in 
the land use sector. 
 
Monitoring 
requirements 
are 
being 
streamlined 
(through 
amendments to the Governance Regulation). NRL will be able to 
update the elements introduced by the LULUCF Regulation 
Review.  
 
LULUCF targets will push Member States to enhance natural 
carbon sinks.  
 
Compliance reports will assess synergies between climate and 
biodiversity 
8th 
Environmental 
Action 
Programme 
(Commission 
proposal for a 
Decision of the 
Being adopted, 
provisional 
agreement 
reached by co-
legislators on 
December 1, 
2021 
 
Legal framework that guides environmental and climate 
policymaking and implementation until 2030. 
 
Includes a policy objective to i.a. restore biodiversity. 
 
Lists potential indicators that overlap with the NRL (common 
birds, grassland butterflies, fish stock, and land take or soil 
cover/ sealing). 
 
Potential co-benefits for restoration. 
 
The foreseen 8th EAP headline indicator set should be coordinated 
with the indicators and monitoring foreseen in the NRL, to ensure 
overall coherence and reduction of administrative burden. 
                                                          
86 Directive 2004/35/CE of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on environmental liability with regard to the prevention and remedying of environmental 
damage CL2004L0035EN0040010.0001.3bi_cp 1..1 (europa.eu)

=== Page 110 (selectable text) ===
228 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
EP and 
Council)87 
Taxonomy 
Regulation88 
 
Delegated acts 
on (1) 
biodiversity and 
ecosystems, (2) 
Climate 
Adaptation and 
(3) Mitigation 
 Existing 
and 
Incoming, 2021. 
 
 
Climate delegated 
act 
(Del 
Reg 
2021/2139) 
 
It outlines criteria for activities so that they substantially 
support at least one of six areas (incl. biodiversity and 
ecosystems) without doing any significant harm to another.  
 
Economic activities qualifying as environmentally sustainable 
will support reaching the NRL targets for protection and 
restoration of ecosystems.  
 
Restoration of wetlands (including peatlands) is identified as a 
sustainable investment under the EU Taxonomy Regulation 
Climate Delegated Act. 
 
The Taxonomy Regulation and its Delegated Act defines technical 
screening criteria for sustainable activities, including 
o 
Biodiversity DNSH criteria for activities with a significant 
contribution to climate change mitigation or adaptation 
o 
Mitigation and adaptation DNSH criteria for activities with a 
signification contribution to biodiversity and ecosystem 
restoration. 
Legislation and 
guidance on 
green public 
procurement (to 
boost NBS)89 
Incoming, 2022 
 
The existing EU GPP sets criteria to facilitate the inclusion of 
green requirements in public tender documents with the aim to 
reach a good balance between environmental performance, cost 
considerations, market availability and ease of verification. 
 
Potential co-benefits for restoration when environmental 
performance criteria reduce pressures on biodiversity.  
 
Invasive Alien 
Species (IAS) 
Regulation90  
Existing 
 
Invasive alien species (IAS) generally cause damage to 
ecosystems, reduce their resilience, including to climate 
change and affect (mostly negatively) the ecosystem services 
provided.  
 
Degraded 
ecosystems 
are 
particularly 
prone 
to 
the 
establishment of IAS. Many IAS thrive particularly in heavily 
modified, ecologically degraded environments. 
 
The IAS Regulation calls for undertaking proportionate 
restoration measures to strengthen the ecosystems' resilience 
towards invasions and to repair the damage caused. 
 
The list of IAS of Union concern was updated the last time in 2019 
and currently includes 36 plants and 30 animals. A new update of 
the list is currently under preparation. The species listed are to be 
addressed as a priority across the Union. As these may negatively 
affect a wide range of ecosystems, whether terrestrial, aquatic or 
marine, implementation of the measures foreseen under the IAS 
Regulation contribute to the objectives of the NRL. 
 
On the other hand, the NRL can be expected to contribute to 
achieving the objectives of the IAS Regulation as ecosystem 
restoration often requires the removal of invasive alien species. 
                                                          
87 Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on a General Union Environment Action Programme to 2030. 8EAP-draft.pdf (europa.eu) 
88 EU taxonomy for sustainable activities | European Commission (europa.eu) EU Taxonomy Climate Delegated Act: EUR-Lex - C(2021)2800 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu) 
89 Case studies and recommendations: Public procurement of nature-based solutions - Publications Office of the EU (europa.eu) 
90 Regulation (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 October 2014 on the prevention and management of the introduction and spread of invasive alien 
species EUR-Lex - 32014R1143 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)

=== Page 111 (selectable text) ===
229 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
 
Article 20 of the IAS Regulation requires Member States to 
“carry out appropriate restoration measures to assist the 
recovery of an ecosystem that has been degraded, damaged, or 
destroyed by invasive alien species of Union concern unless a 
cost-benefit analysis demonstrates, on the basis of the available 
data and with reasonable certainty, that the costs of those 
measures will be high and disproportionate to the benefits of 
restoration. 
 
Article 20 further specifies that these restoration measures shall 
include at least the following: (a) measures to increase the 
ability of an ecosystem exposed to disturbance caused by the 
presence of invasive alien species of Union concern to resist, 
absorb, accommodate to and recover from the effects of 
disturbance and (b) measure to support the prevention of 
reinvasion following an eradication campaign. 
 
Article 21 of the Regulation states that, in accordance with the 
polluter pays principle Member States shall aim to recover the 
costs of measures needed to prevent, minimise or mitigate the 
adverse impacts of invasive alien species, including 
environmental and resources costs as well as the restoration 
costs. 
Restored, healthy ecosystems can reduce the risk of establishment 
of new IAS and reduce their spread in the case of already 
established ones. 
 
A pre-requisite for ecosystems to qualify as restored under the NRL 
could be that IAS are removed or controlled so that they don’t 
significantly alter their main structure and function. 
National 
Emission 
reduction 
Commitment 
Directive 
(NECD)91 
Existing 
 
Sets national reduction commitments for the periods 2020-29 
and 2030 onwards for a range of air pollutants that affects 
ecosystems and biodiversity negatively and contributes to off-
setting restoration efforts through eutrophication, acidification 
and tissue damage. 
 
NECD helps reduce pressures on biodiversity loss, thereby also 
contributing to the foreseen non-deterioration requirement 
under the NRL. 
 
                                                          
91 Directive (EU) 2016/2284 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2016 on the reduction of national emissions of certain atmospheric pollutants, amending 
Directive 2003/35/EC and repealing Directive 2001/81/EC EUR-Lex - 32016L2284 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)

=== Page 112 (selectable text) ===
230 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
Regulation on 
deforestation-
free products92 
Existing  
 
This Regulation does not cover restoration but focuses on 
minimising deforestation and forest degradation.  
 
It aims to guarantee that the products that EU citizens consume 
on the EU market do not contribute to deforestation and forest 
degradation within the EU and globally. 
 
 
EU strategies, programmes or initiatives 
European Green 
Deal93  
Existing  
 
Key elements of the European Green Deal depend on or 
contribute to the restoration of ecosystems, including the 
BDS2030, Farm to Fork Strategy, the climate-neutrality 
ambition by 2050 and the increased climate ambition by 2030, 
the new EU Climate Adaptation Strategy, the zero pollution 
ambition/action 
plan, 
the 
Chemicals 
Strategy 
for 
Sustainability, the Circular Economy Action Plan, and the Just 
Transition Mechanism. Also relevant are the new EU Forest 
Strategy and the new EU Soil Strategy. 
 
NRL contributes to various elements of the Green Deal, which are 
specified in separate rows dedicated to these elements. 
Mid-term review 
and final 
evaluation of the 
Biodiversity 
Strategy to 
202094  
Existing 
 
Provides lessons learned related to restoration.  
 
The following lessons learnt have informed the NRL development: 
(1) successful local examples demonstrate the feasibility of, and the 
benefits from restoration, (2) reliance on voluntary instruments 
alone proved insufficient to mobilise coordinated restoration action 
of sufficient scale; (3) targets need to be specific enough to guide 
implementation and monitoring, and backed by clear definitions; 
(4) insufficient funding is a major barrier to restoration; and (5) an 
EU-wide monitoring effort is necessary to fill knowledge gaps. For 
more information see Annex IX. 
                                                          
92 Proposal for a regulation on deforestation-free products (europa.eu), 17 November 2021 
93 A European Green Deal | European Commission (europa.eu) 
94 Report from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council the mid-term review of the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020 EUR-Lex - 52015DC0478 - EN - EUR-Lex 
(europa.eu); Trinomics B.V. (2021) Support to the evaluation of the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020, and follow-up: Final study report (Publications Office of the EU, 2022) (For a 
summary of main relevant findings: see Annex IX). The Commission Report on the evaluation of the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020 due in April 2022.

=== Page 113 (selectable text) ===
231 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
Biodiversity 
Strategy for 2030 
(BDS2030)95 
Existing  
Contributes to restoration through I.a. the following commitments:   
 
Legally binding targets to be proposed in 2021. 
 
No deterioration of any protected habitats and species by 2030 
- trend to be positive for at least 30 %. 
 
Organic farming: 25 %. 
 
Landscape features: 10 %. 
 
50 % reduction of use and risk of chemical pesticides. 
 
3 billion trees planted. 
 
Reverse decline in pollinators. 
 
Restore 25 000 km free flowing rivers . 
 
New Urban Greening Platform: the Green City Accord. 
 
Invasive alien species: half the number on the red list. 
 
Reduction of pollution from fertilisers. 
 
Reduction of damage to seabed, bycatch. 
 
NRL contributes to achieving the headline ambition to ensure that 
by 2050 all of the world’s ecosystems are restored, resilient, and 
adequately protected, and that Europe's biodiversity is on the path 
to recovery by 2030.  
 
NRL contributes to delivering on the commitment to propose 
legally binding targets. 
 
NRL goes beyond the BDS2030 by including a non-deterioration 
requirement not only for HD Annex I habitats and habitats of 
protected species and within/outside N2000, but also for 
ecosystems beyond any protection (e.g. those not covered by HD 
Annex I habitats and habitats of protected species). 
Farm to Fork 
Strategy (F2F)96 
Existing 
Includes targets that have the potential to contribute to restoration 
by reducing pressures on biodiversity resulting from food 
production: 
 
Reduce the overall use and risk of chemical pesticides by 50 % 
and the use of more hazardous pesticides by 50 % by 2030. 
 
Reduce nutrient losses by at least 50 %, while ensuring that 
there is no deterioration in soil fertility. This will reduce the use 
of fertilisers by at least 20 % by 2030. 
 
Halve per capita food waste at retail and consumer levels by 
2030 (which is to be legally binding once data/baselines 
become available in 2022). 
Contributes to restoring agro and marine ecosystems, if done right, 
through the following: 
 
Target that at least 25 % of the EU’s agricultural land is under 
organic farming by 2030 and a significant increase in organic 
 
As regards the agriculture related targets of F2F, COM invited MS, 
in their CAP Strategic Plan, to set explicit national values for those 
targets, 
taking 
into 
account 
its 
specific 
situation 
and 
recommendations. 
 
The reduction of pressures under F2F helps reduce (further) 
deterioration and thereby decrease the totality of needed 
restoration.  
 
The requirement of no deterioration in soil fertility under F2F and 
the non-deterioration requirement under NRL will strengthen one 
another. 
 
Restoration targets for agro-ecosystems under NRL need to be 
considered in transition efforts to organic farming under F2F. 
 
The organic action plan under F2F (including the use of CAP 
interventions) does not include targets that are legally binding 
target, which can be addressed by the NRL.  
                                                          
95 Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: EU Biodiversity 
Strategy for 2030 Bringing nature back into our lives (20 May 2020). EUR-Lex - 52020DC0380 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu) 
96 A Farm to Fork Strategy for a fair, healthy and environmentally-friendly food system COM/2020/381 final  (20 May 2020) EUR-Lex - 52020DC0381 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)

=== Page 114 (selectable text) ===
232 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
aquaculture (which means the environmental status and 
biodiversity health needs to be improved). 
 
Commitment to bring fish stocks to sustainable levels by 
applying zero tolerance in the fight against illegal, unreported 
and unregulated fishing (IUU) and combat overfishing, 
promote sustainable management of fish and seafood resources 
and strengthen ocean governance, marine cooperation and 
coastal management’. 
 
EU carbon farming initiative under the Climate Pact will 
promote a new green business model based on climate benefits 
such as carbon sequestration.  
 
F2F seeks to enforce existing rules and modify the demand side but 
does not foresee direct restoration activities e.g. establishing no-
take zones. NRL can address this gap. 
 
The promotion of business models for carbon sequestration under 
F2F would support the achievement of targets related to soils under 
NRL. 
 
Ecosystem restoration under NRL will contribute to the F2F goals 
by increasing the health of ecosystems that provide services and 
resilience to the benefit of the food system. 
Zero Pollution 
Action Plan97 
Existing 
 
Contributes to restoration by mitigating pollution as a pressure 
on biodiversity loss, by initiating actions to better prevent, 
monitor and remedy pollution from air, water, soil and 
consumer products.  
 
NRL contributes to monitoring and remedying pollution, including 
from soil.  
Circular 
Economy Action 
Plan98 
Existing 
 
Sets out a plan to reach a climate-neutral circular economy. 
More circular natural resource use (e.g. electronics, packaging, 
plastics, textiles, construction material) can contribute to 
restoration e.g. by mitigating pressures on biodiversity loss 
resulting from land use for extracting and processing materials, 
fuels and food.  
 
Sets out the objective to significantly reduce total waste 
generation and halve the amount of residual (non-recycled) 
municipal waste by 2030, i.a. by developing methodologies to 
minimise the presence of substances that pose problems to 
heatlh or the environment in recycled materials and articles 
made thereof. 
 
Mentions that the development of a regulatory framework for 
certifying carbon removals will be explored to incentivise the 
uptake of carbon removal and increased circularity of carbon, 
in full respect of the biodiversity objectives. This can 
 
                                                          
97 Pathway to a Healthy Planet for All EU Action Plan: 'Towards Zero Pollution for Air, Water and Soil' (12 May 2021) EUR-Lex - 52021DC0400 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu) 
98 A new Circular Economy Action Plan For a cleaner and more competitive Europe (11 March 2020) EUR-Lex - 52020DC0098 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)

=== Page 115 (selectable text) ===
233 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
contribute to restoration when carbon removal and storage are 
nature based, e.g. through restoration of ecosystems, forest 
protection, afforestation, sustainable forest management and 
carbon farming/sequestration. 
 
Announces a regulatory framework for certifying carbon 
removals based on robust and transparent carbon accounting to 
monitor and verify the authenticity of carbon.  
 
The initiatives under the Circular Economy Action Plan 
promotes the uptake of carbon removal and increased 
circularity of carbon in respect of the biodiversity objectives, 
thereby reducing pressures on biodiversity loss. 
Chemicals 
strategy for 
sustainability 
towards a toxic-
free environment 
(CS)99 
Existing  
Outlines i.a. the following actions related to chemical pollution in 
the natural environment: 
 
Proposes new hazard classes and criteria in the CLP Regulation 
to fully address environmental toxicity, persistency, mobility 
and bioaccumulation. 
 
Ensure that the information made available to authorities on 
substances 
allows 
comprehensive 
environmental 
risk 
assessments by strengthening requirements across legislation 
 
Address the impact on the environment of the production and 
use of pharmaceuticals in the upcoming pharmaceuticals 
strategy for Europe. 
 
Support research and development for decontamination 
solutions in terrestrial and aquatic environments. 
 
Reinforce the regulation of chemical contaminants in food to 
ensure a high level of human health protection.  
 
CS helps reduce the pressures on biodiversity loss of chemical 
pollution (e.g. in soils), thereby also contributing to the 
foreseen non-deterioration requirement under the NRL. 
 
                                                          
99 Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability Towards a Toxic-Free Environment (14 October 2020) Strategy.pdf (europa.eu)

=== Page 116 (selectable text) ===
234 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
Green 
Infrastructure 
Strategy100 
Existing 
 
The Natura 2000 network is at the core of the EU’s Green 
Infrastructure (GI) strategy. Additional measures through GI 
deployment, including GI projects at EU level, would improve 
the network's coherence and would help achieve the objectives 
of nature directives aiming to maintain or restore at favourable 
conservation status for all species and habitats of Community 
importance, while at the same time contribute to other targets 
of the BDS2030.  
 
Depending on the local situation, GI deployment will therefore 
require both the conservation of existing biodiverse ecosystems 
in good ecosystem condition, as well as the restoration of 
degraded ecosystems. 
 
National Restoration Plans put in place by MS could take into 
account Green Infrastructure deployment. GI projects will also help 
achieve the objectives of the NRL, if biodiversity principles are 
followed. 
Sustainable 
Carbon Cycles 
communication 
Existing (COM 
(2021) 800 final) 
 
 The Communication sets out short- to medium-term actions to 
support carbon farming and upscale this green business model 
to better reward land managers for carbon sequestration and 
biodiversity protection. By 2030, carbon farming initiatives 
should contribute 42Mt of CO2 storage to Europe's natural 
carbon sinks. Measures to achieve this goal include: 
o 
promoting carbon farming practices under the Common 
Agricultural Policy (CAP) and other EU programmes such 
as LIFE and Horizon Europe's “Soil Deal for Europe” 
research mission, and through national public financing and 
private finance; 
o 
standardising the monitoring, reporting and verification 
methodologies needed to provide a clear and reliable 
certification framework for carbon farming, allowing for 
developing voluntary carbon markets; 
o 
provide improved knowledge, data management and 
tailored advisory services to land managers, both on land 
and within blue carbon ecosystem. 
 
 NRL will include targets that can also be contribute to carbon 
farming, increasing carbon sequestration while often providing 
important co-benefits for biodiversity and other ecosystem 
services. Although very site-dependent in application, the 
following are effective examples of improved land management 
practices:  
o 
Afforestation and reforestation that respect ecological 
principles favourable to biodiversity and enhanced sustainable 
forest management including biodiversity-friendly practices 
and adaptation of forests to climate change; 
o 
Agroforestry and other forms of mixed farming combining 
woody vegetation (trees or shrubs) with crop and/or animal 
production systems on the same land; 
o 
Use of catch crops, cover crops, conservation tillage and 
increasing landscape features: protecting soils, reducing soil 
loss by erosion and enhancing soil organic carbon on degraded 
arable land; 
o 
Targeted conversion of cropland to fallow or of set-aside areas 
to permanent grassland; 
                                                          
100 Green Infrastructure (GI) — Enhancing Europe’s Natural Capital (6 May 2013)  EUR-Lex - 52013DC0249 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)

=== Page 117 (selectable text) ===
235 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
 
The Communication also aims to develop blue carbon 
initiatives, as using nature-based solutions on coastal wetlands 
and regenerative aquaculture. 
o 
 Restoration of peatlands and wetlands that reduces oxidation of 
the existing carbon stock and increases the potential for carbon 
sequestration. 
 
NRL will also include targets which are effective carbon removal 
solutions ensuring no negative impact on biodiversity or ecosystem 
deterioration in line with the precautionary and Do No Significant 
Harm principles.  
 
NRL will benefit of the the carbon farming challenge: every land 
manager should have access to verified emission and removal data 
by 2028 to enable a wide uptake of carbon farming;. 
EU Pollinators 
Initiative101  
Existing 
 
Aims to address the decline of pollinating insects, a key 
structural and functional component across different types of 
terrestrial ecosystems (agro-ecosystems, forests, wetlands, 
heathland and scrubs). Restoration of such ecosystems would 
not be possible without restoration of pollinator populations. 
 
Sets actions to tackle the major causes of pollinator decline, 
which are at the same time key pressures on ecosystems, such 
as land use (change), agriculture, pesticides, environmental 
pollution, invasive alien species.  
 
There is no overlap, only complementarity and synergies. The NRL 
would strengthen the Initiative by providing a legal character to its 
critical elements (overarching objective, monitoring).  
 
The Initiative is currently developing a monitoring system and 
indicators for pollinators which can be used to set a baseline/target 
on pollinators and a monitoring obligation under the NRL.   
 
The Initiative’s action framework will steer and guide the 
development of the NRP under the NRL.  
Climate 
Adaptation 
Strategy102 
Existing 
 
Sets out how the European Union can adapt to the unavoidable 
impacts of climate change. and become climate resilient by 
2050.  
 
Proposes actions that push the frontiers of knowledge on 
adaptation so that we can gather more and better data on 
climate-related risks and losses. 
 
Promotes nature-based solutions for adaptation 
 
Promotes carbon farming as a new green business model based 
on climate benefits such as carbon sequestration (CO2-removal 
from atmosphere). “Through carbon farming, the Commission 
will promote a new business model for land-based carbon 
 
NRL 2050 target that all EU ecosystems are restored by 2050 
reinforces the CAS 2050 climate resilience target, and vice versa. 
 
MS can use CAS data on climate-related risks and losses when 
determining restoration priorities. 
 
NRL contributes to CAS because restoration can be done in a way 
that it is a NBS for adaption. 
 
NRL will include targets that can also be considered as nature-
based solutions for adaptation 
                                                          
101 EU Pollinators Initiative (1 June 2018) EUR-Lex - 52018DC0395 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu) 
102 Forging a climate-resilient Europe - the new EU Strategy on Adaptation to Climate Change (24 February 2021) EUR-Lex - 52021DC0082 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)

=== Page 118 (selectable text) ===
236 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
removals, including financial incentives to rollout nature-based 
solutions”. 
Updated Soil 
Strategy103 
Existing  
 
Sets out a number of initiatives to encourage voluntary action 
by MS. Possible actions including (1) providing support to 
MS in 
drafting 
national 
action plans to 
achieve 
land 
degradation 
neutrality; 
(2) recommending MS 
to address degraded soil in the context of the CAP; 
(3) providing guidelines on afforestation and close to nature 
forestry as means to restore degraded soil; and (4) outlining 
what is needed/expected in the NRL.  
 
Proposes to tabling a Soil Health Law including measures to 
achieve good soil health by 2050. 
 
Soil Strategy outlines what is necessary in the NRL to achieve soil-
related objectives.  
 
The Soil Health Law announced in the Soil Strategy (and subject to 
impact assessment) will contribute to restoring ecosystems, in 
particular by improving soil health.  
 
NRL binding requirements will substantially contribute to soil 
objectives, e.g. in light of soil health and soil biodiversity being 
insufficiently addressed by existing legislation. 
 
Soil Strategy actions will complement and help achieve the NRL 
targets, and vice versa.  
 
Indicators and monitoring in the Soil Strategy and NRL are 
aligned.  
New Forest 
Strategy (FS)104 
Existing  
 
Promotes restoration of damaged forests addressing climate 
change 
adaptation 
(e.g. 
developing 
an 
EU 
framework/guidance) based on best available knowledge and 
practices, including on biodiversity friendly afforestation and 
restoration. 
 
Includes measures for strengthening forest protection and 
restoration and improving and harmonising the planning and 
monitoring of EU forests. 
 
Provides a roadmap for planting at least 3 billion additional 
trees by 2030. 
 
Facilitates existing EU financing mechanisms, explores the 
potential of EIB funds, and provides financial incentives for 
forest owners and managers for improving the quantity and 
quality of EU forests (protection and restoration). 
 
(still under discussion): “The Commission will also “encourage 
MS to design an ecoscheme for forest protection, restoration, 
[…] and develop guidance to pro-vide inspiration […]. 
 
Developing Sustainable Forestry Management indicators and 
criteria under FS will be streamlined with and support the 
achievement of NRL forestry targets: COM will identify additional 
indicators as well as thresholds or ranges for sustainable forest 
management concerning in particular forest ecosystem health, 
biodiversity and climate objectives. Subject to the impact 
assessment, these will be included in the future legislative proposal 
on EU forest planning and monitoring.  
 
FS makes explicit reference to NRL.  
                                                          
103 EU Soil Strategy for 2030 Reaping the benefits of healthy soils for people, food, nature and climate (17 November 2021) EUR-Lex - 52021DC0699 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu) 
104 New EU Forest Strategy for 2030 (16 July 2021) EUR-Lex - 52021DC0572 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)

=== Page 119 (selectable text) ===
237 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
Develops guidance on the different financing measures for 
forest protection, restoration […].” 
Action Plan to 
conserve 
fisheries 
resources and 
protect marine 
ecosystems  
Incoming, 2022 
 
Provides an action plan to conserve fisheries resources and 
protect marine ecosystems, thereby reducing pressures on 
marine ecosystem/species degradation. 
 
NRL targets/monitoring and the action plan both contribute to 
reaching favourable conservation status and good environmental 
status of marine waters. 
EU guidance documents 
Guidance on the 
prioritisation of 
species and 
habitats for 
restoration to 
improve status of 
at least 30 % of 
species and 
habitats currently 
not in FSC105  
Existing (June 
2021) 
 
The guidance provides clarification on the scope of the target 
and suggests criteria for MSs to prioritise habitats and species 
for which measures shall be put in place to improve their status, 
or at least achieve a strong positive trend, by 2030. 
 
There are strong synergies between the NRL and the so-called 
“30% status improvement target”, insofar as both aim at achieving, 
by 2030, significant improvements in the status of habitats and 
species protected under EU Nature legislation. De facto, most of 
the measures required to improve the status of species and habitats 
would quality as ecosystem restoration measures under the 
proposed NRL. 
 
As achieving the (voluntary) 30% status improvement target by 
2030 requires that Member States submit their pledges in 2022 
and start implementing the necessary improvement measures as 
soon as possible thereafter, implementing the target might act as a 
“test-bed” or precursor for the legally binding and ecosystem-
specific (and hence more constraining) targets under the NRL, the 
date of entry into force of which cannot yet be anticipated.  
Criteria and 
guidance for 
protected areas 
designation106  
Existing (January 
2022) 
 
The guidance provides criteria for MSs to identify additional 
protected areas. 
 
There are synergies with the NRL as restored ecosystems under 
NRL outside Natura 2000 or other existing protected areas could be 
designated as (strictly) protected areas thus contributing to the 
relevant BDS2030 targets. Furthermore, protected areas and strictly 
protected areas may contribute to achieving the restoration targets 
under NRL.  
                                                          
105 Guidance on the selection and prioritisation of species and habitats for priority actions to ensure that at least 30% of species and habitats not currently in favourable status are in that 
category by 2030, or at least show a strong positive trend, June 2021. link: https://circabc.europa.eu/ui/group/fcb355ee-7434-4448-a53d5dc5d1dac678/library/4d8f2f91-7708-4ed2-
ba0e-e7a945a6d56a/details 
106 SWD(2022) 23 final

=== Page 120 (selectable text) ===
238 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
Technical 
guidance and 
support to MS to 
identify sites and 
help mobilise 
funding for the 
restoration of 
25,000 km of 
free flowing 
rivers107  
Existing 
(December 2021) 
 
Aims to support the identification of restoration sites and of 
funding opportunities to achieve the BDS2030 target of 
restoring 25 000 km of rivers into free-flowing state. 
 
The guidance document is a stepping stone towards faster and more 
ambitious implementation of the WFD, in line with the BDS2030.  
 
It is designed to provide clarification on the concept of free-flowing 
rivers and to contribute to a common understanding of how this 
target is linked to the objectives of the WFD and of EU Nature 
Directives. 
 
The guidance will support MS in devising measures to achieve a 
potential NRL target related to the restoration of rivers into free-
flowing state. 
Technical 
guidance on 
urban greening 
Incoming (Q1 
2022) 
 
In the BDS2030 the Commission ‘called upon’ all cities of over 
20 000 inhabitants to develop Urban Greening Plans – this 
technical guidance will explain what and how this process can 
be implemented.  
 
The technical guidance will, in this way, help to set the 
framework 
from 
which 
local 
authorities 
can plan 
and implement actions to improve the quality of urban 
ecosystems by making Urban Greening Plans.  
 
It will include suggestions for the governance of urban green 
planning 
(i.e. how 
to 
integrate 
it 
with 
other 
local 
planning processes and how to engage local actors in the 
process) and set a baseline of what indicators need to be 
mapped, measured and monitored to understand local 
ecosystems.  
 
To set and meet any targets – voluntary or legally based 
– relating to 
urban 
greening, 
the 
quality 
of 
urban 
ecosystems requires 
appropriate, 
systematic 
mapping 
and 
monitoring of certain key indicators at the local level.   
 
The technical guidance will support this process fully. Any NRL 
targets for urban ecosystems will be mirrored in the technical 
guidance (and supported by the establishment of an urban greening 
platform).  
Establishment of 
a new 
cooperation-
based EU 
biodiversity 
governance 
(including a 
monitoring and 
Incoming 
 
BDS2030 announced the setting up of a new cooperation-based 
EU biodiversity governance framework to steer the 
implementation of biodiversity commitments agreed at 
national, European and international level. This framework is 
under development and will be finalised  in cooperation with 
the Member States and stakeholders. It will include a system of 
expert groups for the coordinated implementation of the 
Strategy, a monitoring and review mechanism to enable regular 
 
The governance structure for the implementation of the future EU 
Nature Restoration Law will be integrated into the wider 
biodiversity governance framework. This may include: 
o 
new expert groups, Committees, scientific or stakeholder bodies 
to be set up for the implementation of the new legislation,  
o 
certain aspects of the NRL implementation to be reflected in the 
mandate of existing groups and bodies as appropriate (e.g. on 
                                                          
107 Guidance on Barrier Removal for River Restoration (europa.eu), 21 December 2021

=== Page 121 (selectable text) ===
239 
Policy initiatives 
and laws 
Status 
Relevance for ecosystem restoration 
Possible alignment/overlap/synergies with the proposed Nature 
Restoration Law (NRL) 
review 
mechanism) 
progress assessment and corrective action if needed, as well as 
measures to support administrative capacity building, input 
from science, transparency, stakeholder dialogue and 
participatory governance at different levels.  
soil, on forests and nature, on monitoring and assessment and 
others),  
o 
interaction with further groups to ensure synergies with other 
policy areas, 
o 
the integration of indicators and requirements set by the new 
NRL to monitor restoration progress and gather knowledge on 
ecosystem condition and services, into the wider biodiversity 
and environmental monitoring frameworks; and building on 
existing indicators to the extent possible, and 
o 
the streamlining of reporting processes and online tracking tools 
to minimise administrative burden. 
Guidance on new 
sustainability 
criteria on forest 
biomass for 
energy, that have 
to be developed 
under the 
Renewable 
Energy Directive 
– 2021 
(suggestion 
EASME)108  
Incoming, 2021 
 
Provides guidance on sustainability criteria on forest biomass 
for energy, that will be developed under the Renewable Energy 
Directive (RED). 
 
A draft RED and implementing act are currently under 
discussion with MS. The degree of emphasis on biodiversity, 
for example in the context of regeneration, is still to be decided 
on. 
 
 
 
                                                          
108 JRC Publications Repository - The use of woody biomass for energy production in the EU (europa.eu), 2020

=== Page 122 (selectable text) ===
3. Approach to non-deterioration  
It is important to ensure that the condition of ecosystems in the EU does not deteriorate. 
This can apply to areas that need to be restored as well as those that are already in good 
condition and need to be maintained. Protecting areas that still need to be restored from 
further degradation means that less efforts/investments will be needed to restore them later, 
and protecting areas that are already restored means that the returns on such investments 
are maintained. A further argument for non-deterioration can be based on the potential of 
providing ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration or natural carbon storage, e.g. 
wetlands. These would naturally favour the non-deterioration of these territories. Overall, 
an approach needs to be developed in which restoration goes hand in hand with (long-term) 
protection and maintenance.  
To address the issue of non-deterioration it is useful to consider areas of terrestrial territory 
according to the following three main regimes:  
a. Annex I habitats of the HD and habitats of protected species and within N2000. It 
is estimated that 44 % of HD Annex I habitat area lies within Natura 2000. For 
these areas, the duty of non-deterioration is already covered by existing legislation.  
b. Annex I habitats of the HD and habitats of protected species but outside N2000. 
56 % of HD Annex I habitat area lies outside Natura 2000. For these areas, the duty 
of non-deterioration is partly covered by fault-based or negligence-based 
prevention and remediation duties under the Environmental Liability Directive, and 
sometimes by strict liability under this. It is also implicitly covered by the 
requirement of the Habitats Directive to maintain or restore, at favourable 
conservation status, natural habitats and species of wild fauna and flora of 
Community interest at national/biogeographical level. In addition, aquatic and 
riparian habitats within this category benefit from the non-deterioration and other 
requirements of the Water Framework Directive. The duty not to deteriorate also 
exists for breeding sites and resting places of protected species, but this is limited 
to those listed in Annex IV of the Habitats Directive. Relevant duties also exist for 
wild birds’ habitats across the territory of the Member States. However, even taken 
together, there are shortcomings. Therefore, to ensure a comprehensive protection 
level, establishing additional duties under the nature restoration law to ensure 
non-deterioration would probably be needed. These could however, be lighter 
than those obligations to ensure non deterioration within Natura 2000. 
c. Ecosystems beyond any protection (e.g. those not covered by Annex I habitats and 
not habitats of protected species). Ensuring no deterioration for habitats other than 
HD Annex I habitats and habitats of protected species is more challenging, 
although some results are achievable through , for instance, minimum standards for 
farmers benefitting of CAP support of Good Agricultural and Environmental 
Conditions (GAEC) under current cross-compliance. Resulsmay also be achievable 
in other ways; aquatic and riparian habitats within this category, for instance, 
benefit from the non-deterioration and other requirements of the Water Framework 
Directive. A process to set a further non-deterioration requirement (e.g. through

=== Page 123 (selectable text) ===
241 
new duties as explained below) could be established together with the process for 
setting additional targets (e.g. through setting up a monitoring mechanism to 
measure ecosystem conditions and set baselines first). These targets and any 
requirements of non-deterioration could then be established in law in step 2.  
 The following points should also be taken into consideration: 
- 
Habitats outside Annex I that are turned into an Annex I habitat types (through 
restoration / re-establishment) would then become part of Annex I and enjoy the 
same protection, either as in a) or b).  
- 
The EIA and SEA Directives can help identify projects and plans likely to 
exacerbate ecosystem degradation and can be used to help avoid some degree of 
non-deterioration across a), b) and c).  
A similar approach could be envisaged for marine territories. The Marine Strategy 
Framework Directive aims to achieve the broad goal of Good Environmental Status (GES) 
of the EU's marine waters. Further to that, Annex I marine habitats are protected within 
Natura 2000 marine sites, for instance, and enjoy a measure of protection outside them 
thanks to the ELD, the overarching objective of the Habitats Directive and other 
instruments. 
Restored areas need to receive a type of protection that will ensure the full recovery of the 
restored areas and ensure the long-term viability of the restored ecosystem. These could 
for example be designated as protected areas and be taken into account for the 30 % 
protected area and 10 % strictly protected area targets. Member States may choose other 
means to ensure long-term protection of the restored areas, such as Other effective area-
based conservation measures (OECM) or private land conservation measures. Where 
appropriate, in particular in the marine environment, Member States may choose to achieve 
the restoration targets by ensuring strict protection of the areas hosting the degraded 
ecosystems (passive restoration).

=== Page 124 (selectable text) ===
Annex XI: Restoration frameworks in Member States 
Obtaining data on the area of ecosystems undergoing restoration in Europe is a challenge 
due to a number of factors, including the fact that much restoration activity is voluntary 
and that there are few legal mechanisms that require reporting of the areas restored109. The 
Netherlands, Germany, Belgium (Flanders), Austria and Spain have put in place 
Restoration Prioritisation Frameworks. Furthermore, in the first Expert Workshop towards 
an EU legal proposal for binding restoration targets organised by the Commission (9 
December 2020), a number of Member States also shared information about national 
restoration efforts.  
Member States that have submitted Ecosystem Restoration Prioritisation Frameworks 
(RPF) at national or sub-national level (Target 6A in the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 
2020)110 
Netherlands 
Naar een strategisch kader voor ecosysteemherstel (‘RPF’) in 
Nederland (Towards a strategic framework for ecosystem 
restoration in the Netherlands), 2014. 
Germany 
Priorisierungsrahmen zur Wiederherstellung verschlechterter 
Ökosysteme in Deutschland (Prioritisation framework for the 
restoration of degraded ecosystems in Germany), 2015. 
Flanders (Belgium) 
Prioriteitenkader voor ecosysteemherstel in Vlaanderen 
(Prioritisation framework for ecosystem restoration in 
Flanders), 2016. 
Austria 
Strategischer 
Rahmen 
für 
eine 
Priorisierung 
zur 
Wiederherstellung von Ökosystemen auf nationalem und 
subnationalem Niveau, 2020111. 
Spain 
Spanish 
National 
Strategy 
for 
Green 
Infrastructure, 
Connectivity and Ecological Restoration, 2021. 
 
Additional information on national restoration efforts shared by Member States in the first 
Expert Workshop towards an EU legal proposal for binding restoration targets organised 
by the Commission, 9 December 2020 
Sweden 
 Prioritised Action Framework (PAF) for Natura2000 in 
Sweden 
 National environmental objectives 
 National species action programmes 
 Regional plans for Green Infrastructure 
 National programme of action for remediation of water 
courses 
 Municipal biodiversity programmes 
 Wetlands restoration project 2018 - ongoing. Promoting 
construction of new and restored wetlands all over Sweden 
                                                          
109 Technical support in relation to the promotion of ecosystem restoration in the context of the EU 
biodiversity strategy to 2020, Final Report. 
110 SWD/2019/184 final. 
111 Publikationsdetail Strategischer Rahmen für eine Priorisierung zur Wiederherstellung von Ökosystemen 
auf nationalem und subnationalem Niveau, (umweltbundesamt.at).

=== Page 125 (selectable text) ===
243 
in order to strengthen the landscape's own ability to 
maintain and balance water flows 
 
Ireland 
Ireland’s Protected Raised Bog Restoration Programme 
 
Finland 
 Biodiversity strategy 
 Helmi programme 
 METSO programme 
 Ecosystem restoration and management monitoring for 
different habitat groups (forests, semi-natural grasslands, 
mires) 
 
Portugal 
2030 Biodiversity & Nature Conservation National Strategy - 
Resolution of the Portuguese Council of Ministers: 
 
Axis 1 - Improve natural heritage conservation status  
Axis 2 - Promote recognition of the natural heritage value 
Axis 3 - Encourage appropriation of natural values & 
biodiversity by the stakeholders. 
 
Biodiversity & Nature Conservation Action Plan 
Protected Areas Management Plans

=== Page 126 (selectable text) ===
244 
Annex XII: Financing options at EU level 
This annex provides an overview of the financing needs as well as potential sources of 
financing for ecosystem restoration at EU level, including programmes and funds under 
MFF 2021-2027, Next Generation EU as well as private investments. Member States 
would be asked to outline in their National Restoration Plans how they would access these 
sources. In addition, Member States would need to outline available funds from their 
national and local budgets as well as how market-based instruments are used to help cover 
the cost of ecosystem restoration and prevent deterioration. 
The Biodiversity Strategy for 2030 states that biodiversity action requires at least EUR 
20 billion per year stemming from “private and public funding at national and EU level”, 
of which the EU budget will be a key enabler and component. As such, in December 2020 
the EU co-legislators came to the interinstitutional agreement112 to set a biodiversity 
spending target of 7.5 % as of 2024 and 10 % as of 2026 under the 2021-27 MFF. 
Mainstreaming and tracking of biodiversity in EU programmes and funds are currently 
being revised to strengthen biodiversity considerations and fill the financing gap that is, 
according to draft Programme Statements in March 2021, foreseen to be at least 
€1.924 billion for 2026 and €2.291 billion for 2027. 
Specifically, the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD) and 
European Agricultural Guarantee Fund (EAGF) will be central to achieving higher levels 
of biodiversity spending under the 2021-27 MFF. Furthermore, Cohesion policy funds and 
the European Maritime Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund (EMFAF) will also play a central 
role in achieving the biodiversity ambition. Other programmes will also contribute to this 
target, such as LIFE, Copernicus and InvestEU. Member States would also be encouraged 
to seek synergies between different programmes and funds to support large-scale 
implementation of restoration projects. 
Moreover, the Biodiversity Strategy for 2030 states that a significant proportion of the part 
of the 2021-27 MFF dedicated to climate action will be invested in biodiversity and nature-
based solutions. As ecosystem restoration will directly contribute to climate mitigation and 
adaptation objectives, restoration would also benefit from the climate spending target in 
the MFF.  
Financing needs for ecosystem restoration under policy options 3 and 4 
Restoration costs 
According to the two scenarios with different ambition levels (15-40-100 % restoration 
versus 30-60-100 % restoration, both for 2030-2040-2050) presented in the table below 
based on a more detailed table in Annex VI, the average annual restoration, re-creation and 
maintenance costs to 2030 for peatlands, marshlands, forests, heathland and scrub, 
                                                          
112 Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2020/2092.

=== Page 127 (selectable text) ===
245 
grasslands, rivers, lakes and alluvial habitats, and coastal wetlands are estimated at 
EUR 5.3 billion for Scenario A and EUR 7.6 billion for Scenario B.  
Ecosystem type 
Scenario A: 
Scenario B: 
15 % by 2030, 40 % by 2040, 100 % 
by 2050 
30 % by 2030, 60 % by 2040, 100 % 
by 2050 
  
Average annual 
cost to 2030 
(€M) 
Average annual 
cost to 2050 
(€M) 
Average annual 
cost to 2030 
(€M) 
Average annual 
cost to 2050 
(€M) 
Peatlands 
202 
265 
274 
266 
Marshlands 
165 
175 
173 
177 
Coastal Wetlands 
195 
331 
352 
331 
Forests 
2097 
2811 
2916 
2816 
Agro-Ecosystems 
1221 
1353 
1367 
1353 
Heathland and scrub 
139 
148 
148 
149 
Rivers, lakes and 
alluvial habitats 
1299 
2282 
2407 
2279 
Total 
5318 
7365 
7637 
7371 
 
Note: opportunity costs in terms of foregone income (e.g. by landowners as a result of rewetting a grassland 
so that it becomes a wetland) are included in the calculation of restoration and maintenance costs. 
Opportunity costs of potential land use changes (e.g. turning grassland into an industrial district) are not 
included. 
For Natura 2000 sites, estimates of restoration costs until 2030 are also available under 
the MS Prioritised Action Frameworks (PAFs) submitted in March 2021: a total cost for 
one-off maintenance and restoration projects sites for a number of ecosystem types amount 
to approximately EUR 10 billion over 2021-27 (1.4 billion annually). It should be noted 
that these figures focus on Natura 2000 i.e. do not address the broader ecosystem 
restoration funding needs including beyond the N2000 network.  
PAF figures on restoration based on aggregated estimations by Member States 
A: Natura 2000 site-related maintenance and restoration 
measures for species and habitats 
One-off/ project costs (MEUR/year) 
Marine and coastal waters 
103 
Heathlands and shrubs 
79 
Bogs, mires, fens and other wetlands 
201  
Grasslands 
334  
Other agroecosystems (incl. croplands) 
89  
Woodlands and forests 
352  
Freshwater habitats (rivers and lakes) 
272  
Total annual costs 
1 430 
Total (2021-2027) 
10 010

=== Page 128 (selectable text) ===
246 
Note: Opportunity costs such as income foregone are included in the figures for Member States that are 
planning to compensate landowners for restoration. 
The annual cost  figure, for example of EUR 7.6 billion under scenario B, is expected 
to be higher because restoration and maintenance costs for marine, urban and soil 
ecosystems as well as pollinators are not included due to uncertainties and data gaps on 
the restoration need and costs, although it is likely that pollinators will benefit from costs 
incurred to restore terrestrial ecosystems such as grasslands.  
Costs for enabling measures (administrative costs) 
Besides restoration and maintenance, there are costs foreseen for enabling measures such 
as establishing methodologies and indicators, developing National Restoration Plans and 
monitoring progress. According to the impact assessment study in Annex VI, these are 
estimated to include annual costs averaging EUR 583 million from 2022 to 2030 and EUR 
498 million over the period 2022-2050..  
Estimated costs for enabling measures (MEURO) 
  
Average annual costs 
2022-2030  
Average annual costs 
2022-2050  
Surveys of ecosystems  
  
122.1  
37.9  
Development of national restoration plans;  
1.4  
0.4  
Development of methodologies and indicators (5 
ecosystems)  
0.7  
0.2  
Administration of restoration measures  
 438.3 
438.3  
Monitoring of restored ecosystems  
 20.6 
20.6 
Reporting progress against restoration targets  
 0.1 
0.1  
Total annual costs  
583.3  
497.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
While the cost estimates will need to be more precisely calculated, they do provide an 
indication of how much financing at least needs to be mobilised, namely between EUR 5.9 
billion and 8.0 billion over the period 2022-2030. While these costs can be largely 
compensated by increased potential for ecosystem services, it should be noted that this 
estimate does not consider the restoration and maintenance costs for some ecosystems for 
which data is lacking. As such, the total costs are expected to be higher. Moreover, the 
precise costs for each Member State will vary in line with subsidiarity, as costs depend on 
the specific restoration needs, priorities,  measures as well as land prices and wages per 
Member State. 
Cost item 
Amount in EUR billion 
Restoration and maintenance costs for peatlands, marshlands, 
forests, heathland and scrub, grasslands, rivers, lakes and 
alluvial habitats, and coastal wetlands 
5.3 – 7.4  
Enabling measures 
0.6 
 
 
Sub-total  
15.9 – 8.0

=== Page 129 (selectable text) ===
247 
Restoration and maintenance costs for marine, urban and soil 
ecosystems as well as pollinators 
Not exactly determined  
 
EU programmes and funds under MFF 2021-27 and Next Generation EU 
The table below provides an overview of how EU programmes and funds under 
MFF2021-2027 and Next Generation EU can contribute to biodiversity with a focus on 
ecosystem restoration in their specific policy areas. The information, including estimates 
of available funds for biodiversity wherever possible, is based on the ‘Biodiversity 
Financing and Tracking: First Interim Report’ (study commissioned by ENV to 
IEEP/Trinomics, 2021), guidance on river restoration that is currently being prepared 
as well as an ongoing exercise of DGs ENV and BUDG to estimate the contributions from 
MFF funds and programmes to biodiversity in order to reach the new MFF target of 
7.5/10 % for biodiversity spending.  
According to figures prepared by DGs BUDG and ENV, under the MFF 2014-2020, 
biodiversity spending amounted to EUR 85 billion, which was about 8 % of the EU budget. 
Under the MFF 2021-2027, estimates for biodiversity spending are available for 
8 funds/programmes, amounting to nearly EUR 100 billion (EUR 99 123.3 million), 
an average of approximately EUR 14 billion annually, of which a portion can be employed 
to the benefit of ecosystem restoration, including restoration projects, capacity building, 
knowledge exchange, monitoring and transboundary cooperation. This means that the 
EUR 14 billion annual biodiversity spending under the MFF could cover to a large 
extent the annual total costs of restoration of EUR 6-8 billion, complemented with 
other sources of funding mentioned below. Under the current methodology to track 
biodiversity spending in the MFF, it is not possible to estimate how much funds are 
channelled to ecosystem restoration.

=== Page 130 (selectable text) ===
248 
EU programmes and funds under MFF 2021-27 and Next Generation EU 
Source  
 
Preliminary 
estimates of funds 
available for 
biodiversity in 
2021-2027 (MEUR) 
How could this 
financing source be 
used for ecosystem 
restoration? 
Explanation  
Financing type (grants/ loans) 
+ beneficiaries  
European Agricultural 
Guarantee fund (EAGF) 
under the Common 
Agricultural Policy 
(CAP) – still under 
discussion 
37 885.2 
 
Restoration projects 
for agro-ecosystems 
 
 
EAGF funds could be used by MS to finance restoration (soil, 
habitats and species) under the foreseen eco-schemes, if MS 
outline this in their national CAP strategic plans for the 
following specific objective for the period 2023-27: contribute 
to the protection of biodiversity, enhance ecosystem services 
and preserve habitats and landscapes 
 
It is estimated that 14.8 % was counted as biodiversity 
expenditure under MFF 2016-2020. 
 
Grants  
 
Beneficiaries: farmers  
European Agricultural 
Fund for Rural 
Development (EAFRD) 
under the CAP – still 
under discussion 
 26 513.2 
 
Restoration projects 
for agro/ forest 
ecosystems 
 
Capacity/knowledge 
building  
 
Knowledge 
exchange 
 
Cooperation 
 
EAFRD funds could be used for restoration, particularly under 
the following priorities of (1) restoring, preserving and 
enhancing ecosystems related to agriculture and forestry (for 
2021-22); as well as under the specific objective (2) 
contributing to the protection of biodiversity, enhancing 
ecosystem services and preserving habitats and landscapes (for 
2023-2027). 
 
MS would need to incorporate restoration measures in national 
CAP strategic plans. 
 
At least 30 % of funding for each RDP must be dedicated to 
measures relevant for the environment and climate change, 
much of which is channelled through grants and annual and 
multiannual payments to farmers who switch towards more 
environmentally friendly practices or make investments 
environmental related. 
 
While the European Commission approves and monitors CAP 
SP decisions regarding implementation, such as the selection of 
projects and the granting of payments are handled by national 
and regional managing authorities. 
 
It is estimated that 33% of the total EAFRD budget under MFF 
2014-2020 benefitted biodiversity.  
 
Co-financing for EAFRD 
 
Beneficiaries: 
farmers, 
foresters and other land 
owners

=== Page 131 (selectable text) ===
249 
Source  
 
Preliminary 
estimates of funds 
available for 
biodiversity in 
2021-2027 (MEUR) 
How could this 
financing source be 
used for ecosystem 
restoration? 
Explanation  
Financing type (grants/ loans) 
+ beneficiaries  
European Regional 
Development 
Fund (ERDF) 
 
Cohesion Fund (CF) 
20 138.2 
 
Restoration projects 
 
Capacity/knowledge 
building  
 
Cooperation  
 
ERDF could finance restoration projects that support i.a. (1) 
innovation and research; and (2) the low-carbon economy. 
 
ERDF: at least 30 % of ERDF resources shall be allocated to 
Policy Objective 2 (‘A greener, low-carbon Europe’) in each 
MS/category of regions, covering investments in i.a. 
biodiversity, green infrastructure and pollution reduction. 
Investments could include ecosystem approaches as well as 
preserving and protecting the environment. 
 
ERDF Interreg could finance cooperation across borders to 
jointly tackle common challenges and find shared solutions in 
fields i.a. environment (e.g. restoration projects). For cross-
border cooperation, transnational cooperation and outermost 
regions’ cooperation, 60 % of EU resources in programmes 
shall be allocated to at least 3 policy objectives, including 
Policy Objective 2 which is compulsory. 
 
CF supports Policy Objective 2, and may contribute to the 
thematic concentration requirement for the ERDF allocation. 
MS whose GNI per capita is less than 90 % of the EU average 
are eligible.  
 
ERDF and CF could also finance technical assistance.  
 
ERDF and CF are implemented under shared management. 
Each MS prepares at national level a Partnership Agreement, 
including strategy, need, complementarity with other EU 
instruments and priorities to be supported by the funds, that is 
then implemented through programmes. 
 
ERDF: 
grants/financial 
instruments; maximum co-
financing rate from 40 % to 
85 % depending on the 
category of regions. 
 
ERDF 
Interreg: 
co-
financing up to 80 % (85 % 
for outermost regions) 
 
CF: co-financing up to 
85 %. 
 
Beneficiaries: MS, private 
sector 
organisations, 
universities, 
associations, 
NGOs, civil organisations, 
etc. 
Neighbourhood, 
Development and 
International 
Cooperation Instrument - 
Global Europe (NDICI - 
Global Europe)  
NDICI: 6 209.7 
Interreg PA III: 
438.5 
 
Transboundary 
restoration projects 
 
Transboundary 
cooperation  
 
NDICI could facilitate cooperation, knowledge exchange and 
finance for the restoration of ecosystems that extend to non-EU 
countries, with benefits in return for the EU 
 
The first pillar of NDICI (geographical, including climate and 
environmental objectives) has potential to contribute to 
restoration. An EU Delegation, in close consultation with 
 
Grant, Service Contracts, 
blending 
 
Beneficiaries: 
third 
countries/regions bordering 
the EU

=== Page 132 (selectable text) ===
250 
Source  
 
Preliminary 
estimates of funds 
available for 
biodiversity in 
2021-2027 (MEUR) 
How could this 
financing source be 
used for ecosystem 
restoration? 
Explanation  
Financing type (grants/ loans) 
+ beneficiaries  
 
Interreg Pre-Accession 
Assistance (PA) III 
 
Transboundary 
knowledge 
exchange 
EUMS (Team Europe Initiative) and the local Authorities, draft 
country 
MIPs 
(Multiannual 
Indicative 
Programmes). 
Restoration projects could be added once the MIPs are adopted, 
considering they remain flexible. 
 
It is unlikely that the second pillar (thematic liked to SDGs and 
global challenges) would contribute to restoration, unless there 
is a clear global initiative. 
 
The third pillar (rapid response) can contribute in case of an 
emerging opportunity or need in terms of nature restoration in 
a third country, to which the EU could take a strong policy 
stance to influence decisions.  
 
Restoration could furthermore be stimulated under Regional 
Programmes managed by INTPA, e.g. to restore the Amazon 
Basin. 
 
Technical Assistance and Information exchange (TAIEX) 
could also be relevant for knowledge exchange between COM, 
MS and a third country in the context of transboundary 
restoration (workshops, missions and study visits). 
 
The budget line on Overseas Countries and Territories (OCT) 
could also be relevant for restoration.  
 
Interreg PA III can also be relevant. The draft regulation states 
that actions under this Regulation should, whenever possible, 
mainstream environmental sustainability and climate change 
objectives across all sectors with particular attention to 
environmental protection and tackling cross-border pollution. 
While it does not mention restoration explicitly, it could 
support restoration projects of ecosystems that extend to non-
EU countries (Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, 
Montenegro, North Macedonia, Serbia, and Turkey), 
supporting cooperation between candidate countries, potential 
candidate countries and EU Member States, to contribute in 
their accession preparations.

=== Page 133 (selectable text) ===
251 
Source  
 
Preliminary 
estimates of funds 
available for 
biodiversity in 
2021-2027 (MEUR) 
How could this 
financing source be 
used for ecosystem 
restoration? 
Explanation  
Financing type (grants/ loans) 
+ beneficiaries  
Horizon Europe 
6 042.0 
 
Capacity/knowledge 
building 
 
Horizon’s first strategic plan 2021-2024 sets out i.a. the 
following strategic orientation: Restoring Europe's ecosystems 
and biodiversity, and managing sustainably natural resources. 
 
The priority area of ‘societal challenges – supporting research 
that addresses major social, environmental and economic issues 
and challenges’ could support research activities underpinning 
the deployment of restoration projects (e.g. scientific research 
on ecological processes, development of tools for mapping and 
assessment). 
 
Cluster 6 (Food, Bioeconomy, Natural Resources, Agriculture 
and Environment) includes a number of research areas related 
to biodiversity and nature protection, where calls will be 
launched in 2021-2 under the first work programme that can 
build the foundation or a future legal instrument. Also there will 
be a specific biodiversity focuses partnership, which will be 
launched this year.  
 
The priority area of ‘excellent science – aiming to boost top 
level research in the EU’ could help to strengthen the capacity, 
skills, infrastructure and basic science underpinning restoration 
research.  
 
Beneficiaries can respond to calls for proposals/ tenders. 
 
Grants 
and 
procurement 
financing 
 
Beneficiaries: 
typically 
consortia 
including 
universities, 
research 
institutes and businesses 
European Space 
Programme: Copernicus 
930.0 
 
Monitoring 
 
Drawing from satellite Earth Observation and in-situ (non-
space) data, the service component of Copernicus could be used 
to help monitor indicators of ecosystem condition i.a. across the 
areas of land, marine, atmosphere and climate change.  
 
It supports applications i.a. on environment protection, 
management of urban areas, regional and local planning, 
agriculture, forestry and fisheries. 
 
N.a. 
 
Beneficiaries: MS 
Programme for the 
Environment and 
Climate Action (LIFE) 
 (2021-22) 966.5 
 
 
Restoration projects 
 
Capacity/knowledge 
building (e.g. 
 
LIFE could fund restoration projects, in particular those 
supporting the BHD, N2000, IAS Regulation, BDS2030 and 
Green Deal.  
 
Grants, blending, prizes.

=== Page 134 (selectable text) ===
252 
Source  
 
Preliminary 
estimates of funds 
available for 
biodiversity in 
2021-2027 (MEUR) 
How could this 
financing source be 
used for ecosystem 
restoration? 
Explanation  
Financing type (grants/ loans) 
+ beneficiaries  
testing innovative 
solutions) 
 
LIFE also offers technical assistance. 
 
Beneficiaries can submit restoration proposals. 
 
The EU LIFE Programme has been the EU’s top funder for the 
restoration projects in a study by UNEP-WCMC, FFI and ELP, 
funding 76 % of the projects and accounting for 48 % of all 
funding for restoration in Europe. 
 
Beneficiaries: Public and 
private sector bodies and 
civil society organisations 
European Maritime 
Fisheries and 
Aquaculture 
Fund (EMFAF) 
 
 
Restoration projects 
(marine and rivers)  
 
Capacity/knowledge 
building 
 
EMFAF could fund marine and inland (river) water restoration 
projects, both inside and outside N2000, in support of the 
priorities of i.a. (1) fostering sustainable fisheries and the 
conservation of marine biological resources; and (2) 
strengthening international ocean governance and enabling 
safe, secure, clean and sustainably managed seas and oceans. 
 
Under shared management, EMFAF is managed jointly by 
COM and MS and is implemented through national 
programmes prepared by MS managing authorities, where 
they outline their choices for fulfilling the objectives of the 
fund and identify actions in line with their national 
strategy. Under direct management, beneficiaries can 
respond to calls for proposals, including by CINEA, based 
on work programmes set out annually by the Commission.  
 
In addition, under direct management, the EMFAF will support 
voluntary contributions to international organisations and 
technical assistance. 
 
Co-financing  
 
Beneficiaries: MS, who can 
finance project submissions 
to calls for proposals 
 
Grants and tenders 
 
Beneficiaries: Public and 
private sector bodies and 
civil society organisations 
European Social Fund 
(ESF) + 
 
 
Capacity/knowledge 
building 
 
 
 
ESF could indirectly contribute to restoration by co-financing 
projects to equip people with the skills to contribute to 
restoration projects. 
 
It is unlikely that substantial amounts of funds will be made 
available for biodiversity, let alone restoration. 
 
Grants  
 
 
Beneficiaries: MS 
Just Transition Fund 
(JTF) 
 
 
Restoration projects 
(e.g. peatlands) 
 
The first pillars of the Just Transition Mechanism is a new Just 
Transition Fund of €17.5 bn (€7.5 bn from 2021-2027 MFF and 
 
Co-financing according to 
Cohesion policy rules

=== Page 135 (selectable text) ===
253 
Source  
 
Preliminary 
estimates of funds 
available for 
biodiversity in 
2021-2027 (MEUR) 
How could this 
financing source be 
used for ecosystem 
restoration? 
Explanation  
Financing type (grants/ loans) 
+ beneficiaries  
 
Capacity/knowledge 
building  
10 bn from the EU Recovery Instrument) to support MS in their 
green transition. 
 
JTF may support investments in land recovery action in eligible 
territories most affected by an economic transition to carbon 
neutrality by 2050. 
 
MS need to develop territorial just transition plans including 
social, economic, and environmental challenges; development 
needs (incl. environmental rehabilitation); and objectives to be 
met by 2030.  
 
JTM could provide technical assistance, e.g. on how to 
integrate restoration in transition projects. 
 
MS may, on a voluntary basis, transfer to the JTF additional 
resources from their national allocations under the ERDF and 
ESF+. 
 
The second pillar under JTM, a dedicated InvestEU scheme, 
will be addressed under the InvestEU item. 
 
Loans 
backed 
by 
EU 
guarantees 
 
 
Beneficiaries: MS 
European 
Solidarity Corps 
 
 
Restoration projects 
 
Organisations can apply for the European Solidarity Corps 
funding as a response to calls for proposals by COM to develop 
restoration projects in which young people (18-30) can 
participate once approved. 
 
Young people can do volunteering (2 weeks to 1 year), usually 
abroad in the Programme or Neighbouring Countries. COM 
outlines volunteering opportunities.  
 
Young people can prepare their own Solidarity Projects 
addressing local challenges such as restoration.  
 
Grants 
 
Beneficiaries: young people, 
MS 
InvestEU 
 
 
Restoration projects 
 
InvestEU, including a dedicated scheme linked to the Just 
Transition Mechanism, is expected to mobilise more than €372 
billion of public and private investment through an EU budget 
guarantee of €26.2 billion that backs the investment of financial 
partners such as the European Investment Bank (EIB) Group 
and others. 
 
Co-finance through loans, 
guarantees, 
equity 
etc., 
backed by an EU guarantee  
 
Beneficiaries: implementing 
partners with whom the 
Commission has concluded 
a guarantee agreement (e.g.

=== Page 136 (selectable text) ===
254 
Source  
 
Preliminary 
estimates of funds 
available for 
biodiversity in 
2021-2027 (MEUR) 
How could this 
financing source be 
used for ecosystem 
restoration? 
Explanation  
Financing type (grants/ loans) 
+ beneficiaries  
 
It could co-finance and attract private investments for either 
specific restoration projects or broader projects where 
restoration is a component. 
 
See more information in the section on public-private 
investments. 
EIB, 
EBRD, 
national 
promotional banks) 
Technical Support 
Instrument (TSI)  
 
 
 
Capacity/knowledge 
building  
 
Knowledge 
exchange 
 
TSI provides tailor-made technical expertise to EU Member 
States to design and implement reforms in the areas of i.a. 
climate action (but biodiversity qualifies as well), for example 
in the drafting of National Restoration Plans. 
 
MS can once a year submit a request for strategic and legal 
advice, studies, training and expert visits on the ground. 
 
Grants 
(no 
co-financing 
needed) 
 
Beneficiaries: MS 
Recovery and Resilience 
Facility (RRF) 
 
 
Restoration projects  
 
RRF could finance restoration projects, or projects with a 
restoration component. All reforms and investments must be 
implemented by 2026. 
 
The preamble of the RRF Regulation states that the Regulation 
should contribute to mainstreaming biodiversity action in 
Union policies, and that the instrument should also tackle 
broader environmental challenges within the Union, i.a. the 
protection of natural capital and preserving biodiversity. Article 
18(4e) states that the RRPs should include a qualitative 
explanation of how measures contribute to the green transition, 
including biodiversity, and whether they account for an amount 
that represents at least 37% of the plan’s total allocation, based 
on the climate tracking methodology present in Annex IV.   In 
the 
climate 
tracking 
methodology, 
biodiversity-related 
Intervention Fields include 050 on “nature and biodiversity 
protection, natural heritage and resources, green and blue 
infrastructure” as well as 049 on the protection, restoration and 
sustainable use of Natura 2000 sites.  
 
Based on the 22 adopted Recovery and Resilience Plans, the 
majority of Member States have shown a strong commitment 
to biodiversity. Relevant measures include reforms and 
 
Combination of loans and 
grants  
 
Beneficiaries: MS

=== Page 137 (selectable text) ===
255 
Source  
 
Preliminary 
estimates of funds 
available for 
biodiversity in 
2021-2027 (MEUR) 
How could this 
financing source be 
used for ecosystem 
restoration? 
Explanation  
Financing type (grants/ loans) 
+ beneficiaries  
investments dedicated to restoring degraded ecosystems; 
implementing sustainable forest management and protecting 
habitats and species; improving forests’ health and resilience; 
strengthening the knowledge of natural environment, such as 
biodiversity monitoring and setting conservation objectives and 
Natura 2000 management plans. Climate adaptation measures 
are also included in the plans, and can contribute to biodiversity 
objectives (e.g. when integrating nature based solutions).

=== Page 138 (selectable text) ===
Private investments 
Recognising that public grants cannot cover all the finance needed to reverse biodiversity 
loss and to have all EU ecosystems restored by 2050, there is a critical role for private 
sector grants as well as public and private commercial funding (including green equity and 
debt or bonds).  
 
Private and/or commercial finance and investment solutions are increasingly considered as 
an 
option, 
as 
attention for 
the 
interrelation 
between nature, the 
economy and finance grew significantly over the last years. WEF113 stated (2021) that 
over half of global GDP depends on nature and the services it provides. The Independent 
‘Dasgupta’ Review on the Economics of Biodiversity114 (2021) offers another recent 
case in point, by underlining that our economies, livelihoods and well-being highly depend 
on nature. The study ‘Indebted to Nature: Exploring biodiversity risks for the Dutch 
financial sector’115 (2020) furthermore demonstrates that the financial sector–through 
investments in economic activities that depend on ecosystem services–is exposed 
to considerable material risk as a result of biodiversity loss. This makes the case for 
investing in nature and biodiversity for risk mitigation and economic resilience purposes. 
The Task Force on Nature-related Financial Disclosures (TNFD)116 is currently 
developing a framework for financial institutions and corporates to identify and report on 
nature-related risks and dependencies. 
 
At the same time awareness is growing that opportunities to invest in nature are 
huge. According to the World Economic Forum117, action for nature-positive transitions 
at the global level could generate up to US$ 10.1 trillion in annual business value and 
create 395 million jobs by 2030. Through the Finance for Biodiversity Pledge118, a 
number of financial institutions have committed to share knowledge, engage with 
companies, assess impacts on biodiversity, set targets and report publicly with the ultimate 
goal to reverse biodiversity loss in this decade.  
 
An upcoming field is financing nature-based solutions (NBS) through multiple-benefit 
business cases where revenue streams come from co-benefits in terms of climate 
adaptation, health and carbon. The Impact Assessment study by the contractor provides 
insight in the co-benefits arising from services provided by specific ecosystems (e.g. 
peatlands offering much potential for carbon storage and sequestration), thereby helping 
to identify possible revenue streams for restoration. 
                                                          
113 New Nature Economy Report. 
114 Final Report - The Economics of Biodiversity: The Dasgupta Review. 
115 https://www.dnb.nl/en/actueel/dnb/dnbulletin-2020/indebted-to-nature/. 
116 https://tnfd.info/. 
117 World Economic Forum, New Nature Economy Report II: The Future of Nature and Business, 14 July 
2020. 
118 https://www.financeforbiodiversity.org/about-the-pledge/.

=== Page 139 (selectable text) ===
257 
 
There is also growing attention for the interrelation between nature, the economy and 
finance at EU level. The EU Business @ Biodiversity Platform119, for example, provides 
a forum for dialogue and policy interface to discuss the links between business and 
biodiversity at EU level. It was set up by the European Commission with the aim to work 
with and help businesses integrate natural capital and biodiversity considerations into 
business practices. Other initiatives at EU level such as the upcoming Renewed 
Sustainable Finance Strategy, Green Bond Standard, EU Taxonomy and Non-financial 
Reporting Directive also contribute to ensure that the financial system supports the 
transition towards a sustainable economic recovery.  
 
There are multiple examples of schemes and partnerships that aim at channeling private 
investments towards biodiversity objectives, such as the Nature+ Accelerator 
Fund120, Rewilding Europe121, Commonland122, Naturvation123, CDC Biodiversité’s 
offset banking124 and the Coalition for Private Investment in Conservation125.  
 
UNEP-WCMC, FFI and ELP (2020) studied the funding of ecosystem restoration in 
Europe126, and found the following:  
 Between 2010 and 2020, more than EUR 1.2 billion has been committed to over 
400 projects, restoring over 11 million hectares of degraded ecosystems across 
Europe. 
 To enable this, more than 200 funders from international bodies (most notably the 
European Commission), European governments, foundations and the private sector 
committed more than EUR 847 million in primary funding, with a further EUR 360 
million committed as co-funding. 
 Over 85 % of the restoration projects focused on terrestrial ecosystems, totalling 
over EUR 1 billion in project funding, with the majority of projects focusing on 
terrestrial forests, grasslands and wetlands. 
 Over EUR 138 million has been committed to restoring European seas, focusing 
primarily on coastal marine ecosystems. 
 Biodiversity conservation was the focus for 8 out of 10 projects and received nearly 
80 % of the known funding. The aims of the remaining projects predominantly 
reflect climate change-related ambitions, such as mitigation and adaptation. 
 
                                                          
119 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/biodiversity/business/index_en.htm 
120 Nature + Accelerator Fund. An innovative and scalable market strategy for Nature-based Solutions. 
121 https://rewildingeurope.com/. 
122 https://www.commonland.com/. 
123 https://naturvation.eu/. 
124 https://www.cdc-biodiversite.fr/la-compensation-ecologique/recourir-a-un-site-naturel-de-
compensation/. 
125 http://cpicfinance.com/. 
126 UNEP-WCMC, FFI and ELP, A summary of trends and recommendations to inform practitioners, 
policymakers and funders, 2020.

=== Page 140 (selectable text) ===
258 
Whilst the needs and opportunities are clearly on the rise, the overall finance and 
investment landscape for nature and biodiversity finance and investment remains scattered 
and overall insufficient to counter negative trends.  
 
The Commission will therefore consolidate and intensify its efforts to mobilise public and 
private funds and partnerships in support of the objectives set out in the EU Biodiversity 
Strategy for 2030 and related initiatives such as the Commission Communication on 
Repair and Prepare for the Next Generation127. In line with those strategic orientations, 
efforts are under way to establish a dedicated ‘EUR 10 billion natural-capital and circular 
economy investment initiative’ building on InvestEU and taking into consideration lessons 
learned from other public private funds such as the Natural Capital Financing Facility128 
and the Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund129 operated by the EIB 
Group in cooperation with other public and private investment teams. It will make use of 
the EUR 9.8 billion guarantee for the Sustainable Infrastructure window (of which 60 % 
is earmarked for climate and environment targets), EUR 6.5 billion under the Research, 
Innovation and Digitalization window as well as EUR 6.9 billion under the Small and 
Medium Businesses window. On top of this, other EU programmes and funds will be 
tapped from as well as philanthropic institutions would be welcomed to contribute as 
well with the aim to unlock even more private funds. Note that this initiative under 
InvestEU is only a small part of the portfolios of EIB Group and other implementing 
partners, which means that there are potentially many more funds to tap from. 
 
The availability of a pipeline of viable investment proposals (project and corporate 
investments) will be a critical factor for success. Based on lessons learned from the past, a 
significant effort is required to ensure the supply of adequate and multi-disciplinary 
technical assistance. A EUR 50 million green advisory initiative is therefore being 
established, funded from the LIFE programme. Funds will be used to top-up the InvestEU 
Advisory Hub that provides advisory services to public and private project promoters, as 
well as supporting financial and other intermediaries that take care of the implementation 
of financing and investment operations. Such advisory support includes three components: 
(1) project advisory for project identification, preparation, financial structuring, 
establishment of investment platforms and blending facilities; (2) capacity building for 
strengthening investment readiness and capacity of organisations, environmental and 
social sustainability impact assessments, procurement and compatibility with state aid 
rules; and (3) market development for preparatory activities in the form of studies, market 
assessment for policy development, communication and awareness raising. The LIFE 
sponsored contribution will be used i.e. to establish and co-finance a roster of green 
investment experts and other means to promote the development of natural capital 
                                                          
127 Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the European Council, the Council, 
the European Economic and Social Committe and the Committee of the Regions Europe's Moment: 
Repair and Prepare for the Next Generation, COM/2020/456 final. 
128 Natural Capital Financing Facility. Boosting investment for biodiversity and nature-based adaptation to 
climate. 
129 https://www.eib.org/en/products/equity/funds/geeref

=== Page 141 (selectable text) ===
259 
assessments that can help identify green investment opportunities for companies, sectors, 
and regions in the EU (possibly to be extended internationally).  
 
To further encourage and support the mainstreaming of biodiversity among businesses 
and financial institutions, there is a considerable amount of information and 
tools available, such as the EIB’s step-by-step guide to invest in nature, B@B’s report 
‘Positive Impact Finance for Business & Biodiversity: Opportunities and challenges 
on scaling projects and innovations for biodiversity by the financial sector’130 and 
SBTN’s ‘Science-based Targets for Nature: Initial Guidance for Business’131.   
 
All should allow to untap the significant potential for investing in nature restoration, 
including from private and commercial actors. Success will nevertheless require 
persistence over time; realistically, it can easily take five years or more to develop a 
significant pipeline of economically viable projects. The setting of a first batch of legally 
binding targets for nature restoration across the EU will greatly encourage public and 
private actors to join efforts in designing and funding viable nature restoration assets and 
activities that will enhance the resilience of our economies and people depending on it. 
 
Conclusion 
While the cost estimates will need to be more precisely calculated, it does provide an 
indication of how much funding at least needs to be mobilised, namely about EUR 6-8 
billion annually until 2030, excluding restoration and maintenance costs for marine, urban 
and soil ecosystems as well as pollinators. So, the total cost is expected to be higher than 
this figure.  
To reach this amount, a range of sources can be harnessed: First, under the MFF to 2027 
100 billion will be available for biodiversity spending, which is equivalent to EUR 14 
billion annually, of which a percentage could be used for restoration. Similar amounts 
could potentially become available under subsequent MFFs, especially if the biodiversity 
spending target of 10 % is extended.  
Second, the ‘EUR 10 billion natural-capital and circular economy investment 
initiative’ could be used, which is to be partially financed by InvestEU’s sustainable 
infrastructure window of EUR 9.8 billion, of which 60 % is earmarked for climate and 
environmental targets. Parts of the guarantees under this facility could be employed as well 
as mobilise additional funds from private sources. The Research, Innovation and 
Digitalization window (EUR 6.5 billion) and Small and Medium Businesses window 
(EUR 6.9 billion) could also be tapped into, in addition to other funds from EIB Group and 
                                                          
130 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/biodiversity/business/assets/pdf/Positive_Impact_Finance-
EU_Business_Biodiversity_Platform_2018.pdf 
131 https://sciencebasedtargetsnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/Science-Based-Targets-for-Nature-
Initial-Guidance-for-Business.pdf

=== Page 142 (selectable text) ===
260 
other implementing partners. To do so coherently, MS could stimulate and/or partner up 
with private entities to submit project proposals that benefit restoration. 
Third, market-based instruments could be promoted to help cover costs of restoration 
and to prevent deterioration, for example fiscal approaches, payments for ecosystem 
services, result-based payment schemes, etc.  
Lastly, national budgets could cover any outstanding costs. The revised Guidelines on 
State aid for environmental protection and energy (CEEAG)132 and the revision of 
Commission Regulation (EU) No 651/2014 declaring certain categories of aid compatible 
with the internal market in application of Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty (block 
exemption Regulation)133 will allow Member States to grant state aid based on the 
investment costs for restoration, decontamination and biodiversity improvement works 
including protection/maintenance. Specifically, the guidelines state that investments may 
qualify if they lead to i.a. (a) the remediation of environmental damage; (b) the 
rehabilitation of natural habitats and ecosystems; (c) the protection or restoration of 
biodiversity and (d) the implementation of nature-based solutions for climate change 
adaptation and mitigation. If an investment does not fulfil the criteria for falling under the 
block exemption Regulation, the State aid would have to be notified to the Commission 
and analysed further before it could be approved. The aid may cover 100 % of the eligible 
costs minus the increase in the value of the land. The limit for funding individual 
restoration projects without notification is EUR 20 million per project. Above this amount, 
Member States will need to notify the investment to the Commission. State aid, however, 
cannot be granted to cover forgone income of economic operators, as the amount of the 
aid is calculated on the basis of the costs of the restoration project. Something else to keep 
in mind is that if the land or marine area is not used to conduct economic activities, support 
for its restoration projects would in principle fall outside the framework for state aid, as 
the notion of aid applies to support that benefits an economic activity.  
In sum, while these figures provide order of magnitude estimates only, it supports the idea 
that there is a variety of sources of funding available to finance the costs for restoration, 
maintenance (including compensation) and enabling measures. In theory there is sufficient 
funding available, however, it depends on the priorities and actions of Member States and 
the EU whether these funds will be channeled towards ecosystem restoration. It can be 
expected that a legally binding instrument will contribute to this significantly.  
 
                                                          
132 Communication from the Commission – Guidelines on State aid for climate, environmental protection 
and energy 2022, C/2022/481. 
133 https://ec.europa.eu/competition-policy/state-aid/legislation/regulations_en